OTHELLO:
FROM BEGINNER TO MASTER
Othello: From Beginner to Master – A Few Words
A FEW WORDS
After the 2003 US National Championships, I set out on a mission to do what few others have even
attempted – to write a book about Othello. Former World Champion Brian Rose has been writing his
book for over 3 years and every time I asked the other tournament regulars about it, there was no new
news on it. I finally decided that I was tired of waiting and started to work on my own book.
While most of my counterparts are usually only playing against other top players, I play many games
against people who are still learning, and I think I have special insight into the kinds of questions that
they might have. I’ve put a lot of effort into the diagrams and exercises, in fact, many of the exercises
in this book are based on positions that I consistently see beginning level players misplay.
I’m sure that there are mistakes in this version. In fact, every time I go through it I find one more thing
I need to fix, however, I think that the form that it is in now is suitable for general consumption. I’m still
working on the rest of the book. It’s taken me three full months to get through the beginner material. I
imagine it will take me three months to four months get through the intermediate section, and another
three months to four months get through the advanced section.
Once I finish all of this and re-edit it (add a table of contents, for instance), I intend to look for a
publisher. If there is no interest in it from the established publishing community, I will be looking into
selling it (the thought of printing out copies at Kinko’s and shipping them myself has crossed my
mind). Part of the reason I’m giving this away is that it’s good for the Othello community. I’m also
hoping that people will like it and it will generate interest in my book. If you have any comments, or
you would like to point out any serious errors, please feel free to do so. I’ve set up a Yahoo group
specifically for discussion about the book at http://groups.yahoo.com/group/randysothellobook.
Happy Flipping,
Randy Fang
October 26, 2003
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Forward
INTRODUCTION
Forward
You’re probably reading this book because you want to learn how to play Othello™* well. Maybe
you’ve just learned the game or maybe you don’t know it at all. My goal is to speed up the process to
mastery by stepping you through many of the lessons that every master level player has learned
through hard work and a lot of practice. I’ll start off at the most basic level and progress from basic
principles to some of the more flexible principles and exceptions that Master level players apply in
championship level play.
In essence, what I’m trying to do is write the Othello equivalent of Nimzovich’s My System (a chess
book). At the current time, there is no book in the Othello world to form the basis for discussion and
analysis of games. Most master level discussions in the US occur over a real board at infrequent
tournaments and I’ve tried to present as much of the terminology as possible. By no means is all the
information complete and it’s only as accurate as myself and the people I’ve consulted while writing
the material. Just like My System has done in chess – this book is meant to provide a basis for
analytical discussion as well as revisions and exceptions to the theories presented.
I’d also like to take this opportunity to thank everyone who is involved in the Othello community for
their support. I’d particularly like to thank Gunnar Anderson for making WZebra and its toolset for
making the images in this document freely available.
Finally, many deserved thanks go out to my two editors and good friends: Amanda Jones (writing
style and beginner level feedback) and Edmund Yiu (technical and master level feedback).

* OTHELLO IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ANJAR CO.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Tools of the Trade
Tools of the Trade
Two Options – High Tech and Low Tech
Before we start, I’d like to take a moment to talk about what equipment you might want to get your
hands on before reading this book. As a minimum requirement, you’ll need to have an Othello board
of some kind on hand to play a few sample games with yourself or preferably with an opponent to get
a feel for the rules and principles that I will introduce.
If you’re more technologically inclined , I recommend you download WZebra from the Internet
(http://www.nada.kth.se/~gunnar/othello.html). You can use it to set up the positions presented in the
book or to play a few quick games to get acquainted with how to play. For beginning through
advanced players, the lowest skill setting on WZebra will provide a HIGHLY challenging opponent ,
don’t be discouraged, WZebra is a very strong player. You might consider downloading one of the
“weaker” Othello playing programs to play with so you don’t get discouraged. A much better idea is to
seek out competition on the Internet. There are several places that you can play online, here’s a short
list of some of the sites that are available and the advantages and disadvantages of each:
Gaming Site
Advantages
Disadvantages
MSN Gaming Zone
(http://zone.msn.com/reversi)
Slightly “friendlier” interface than
the rest.

Can’t resume a game after a
disconnection
Non-standard color scheme
Cheaters
No Timed Games
Yahoo Games
(http://games.yahoo.com)
Ability to resume games after a
disconnection
Timed Games
Starting position is backwards
Cheaters
Kurnik.pl
(http://kurnik.pl/en)
Ability to resume games after a
disconnection
Timed Games
Database of previous games
Mostly Polish players – Not
many English speaking players
Playsite
(http://www.playsite.com)
Ability to resume games after a
disconnection
Timed Games
Lack of players
Vinco Online Games (VOG)
(http://vogclub.com)
High quality human competition
Ability to resume games after a
disconnection
Timed Games
Database of previous games
Partially effective anti-cheat
features
NOT FREE
Many people have attitude
problems
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello Notation
Othello Notation
Standard Starting Position
On the left you’ll find the standard Othello starting
position. Each side starts with two disks in the
center of the board.
Standard Othello notation is based on a grid. The
letters run from left to right and represent the
columns. The numbers run from top to bottom
and represent the rows. This means that the topleft corner is A1, the bottom-left corner is A8, the
top-right corner is H1, and the bottom-right corner
is H8. In the standard starting position, black
has disks at E4 and D5. White has disks at D4
and E5.
All the diagrams in this book will have the
columns and rows labeled appropriately on the
top and left edges so, while memorization of this
grid will be helpful, it should not be necessary.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Rules of Othello
Rules of Othello
Objective
To have the most discs at the end of the game.
General Rules
Each player starts with 32 disks at hand. One side of each disk is black, the other side is
white.
One player plays their disks white side up and the other player plays their disks black side up.
The player playing their disks white side up is called white, the player playing their disks black
side up is called black
Black always plays first.
Both players take turns playing valid moves into empty squares. (Black plays, then White
plays, then Black plays, then White plays, etc). After playing a valid move, the appropriate
disks are “flipped” to the current player’s color. (See the following example for more details on
valid moves and flipping disks).
If a player has no valid moves– they must pass their turn. The other player then plays a
second turn in a row. If the second player still has no legal moves, they must pass again.
This means that a player can potentially move 2, 3, or even 15 times in a row. When a player
passes, they give one of their disks to their opponent.
The game ends when both players have no legal moves – in most cases this is when the
board has no empty squares left. In rare cases – the game will end because neither player
has a legal move in the position.
Valid Moves:
Moves must be played to an empty square adjacent to a disk of the opposing color
You must play a move that “outflanks” disks of the opposing color. Disks that are
“outflanked” are flipped to the color of the disk that was played.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Rules of Othello
A S imp le Examp le:
STANDARD START POSITION
AFTER BLACK PLAYS E6
From the standard starting position, black plays a move to the E6 square. The E4 and E6 disks now
outflank the disk on the E5 square and the white E5 disk is flipped to black.

BEFORE WHITE PLAYS F4
AFTER WHITE PLAYS F4
As the second move of the game, the white player plays to the F4 square. The disk on E4 is
outflanked by the D4 and F4 disks and it is flipped to white.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Rules of Othello
BEFORE BLACK PLAYS C3
AFTER BLACK PLAYS C3
Note that disks can also be outflanked diagonally. For instance, for the third move of this game, the
black player plays C3 and the disk on D4 is outflanked by the disks on C3 and E5 and it is flipped.

A Few More Co mpl icate d Exa mples :
BEFORE WHITE PLAYS C5
AFTER WHITE PLAYS C5
In this position, white plays to C5 outflanking the disks on C3 and C4 and they are flipped. Note that
there aren’t any “chain reactions” , for instance, even though the disks on D4 and E4 are now
“outflanked” by the disks on C4 (which just flipped) and F4 – they are NOT flipped.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Rules of Othello
BEFORE BLACK PLAYS D2
AFTER BLACK PLAYS D2
Disks can also be flipped in more than one direction. For instance, in the above diagram, white plays
D2 and the disks D3, D4 and D5 are outflanked by D2 and D6 and the disk on E3 is outflanked by the
disks on D2 and F4.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello Transcripts
Othello Transcripts
For full games, Othello transcripts are written in a “60 move” format. Each played move is labeled
with the move number that it was played on. The middle 4 squares (the start position) are left
unmarked as they were there when the game started. Here’s an example of a transcript and the
corresponding position after 10 moves.

Exercise: Play through the transcript below and verify that you end up in the expected position.

T RANSCRIPT
FINAL POSITION
In this book, I will often start with a diagrammed example position. If I want to demonstrate some
concept from that position, I will create a transcript in a similar format. The disks that represent the
original diagram are unmarked, and the moves that are played are labeled (starting at one). An
example of this appears on the following page.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello Transcripts
EXAMPLE POSITION
EXAMPLE T RANSCRIPT
The picture to the left displays the resulting board
after the indicated moves have been played
Final Position
Near the beginning of the book, I will rely heavily on move to move pictures to help you visualize the
positions and what is happening without needing a board. As we move on to more advanced topics
(and you become accustomed to visualizing the resulting positions), I will start using the above
transcript format to describe games and concepts.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello Transcripts
Exercises: The following two games were played at previous World Othello Championships. Follow
through them on a real board and verify that you end up in the expected ending position. If you didn’t
you should try again because you must have misflipped.

SEELEY VS. SHAMAN – 2002 WORLD OTHELLO CHAMPIONSHIP – FINALS – GAME 1
CASPARD VS. MURAKAMI – 1998 WORLD OTHELLO CHAMPIONSHIPS – FINALS – G AME 3
Exercises: Find the valid moves in the following positions. The following positions are taken from a
game between former US Champion Raphael Schreiber and former US and World Champion Brian
Rose at the 2000 US National Championships.
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello Transcripts
1. BLACK TO PLAY
2. WHITE TO PLAY
3. BLACK TO PLAY
4. WHITE TO PLAY
Answers:
1. D7, F1, F2, F8, G3, G4, G5, G7, H5, and H7 are the legal moves for black
2. A2, A4, B1, B2, B7, B8, C1, D1, E8, G7, and G8 are the legal moves for white
3. F2, G5, G7, G8, H4, H5, H6, and H7 are the legal moves for black
4. B1, C1, D1, G1, G2, G3, G8, H4, and H5 are the legal moves for white.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
FOR BEGINNERS
Othello 101
I’d like to start with a metaphor. In chess, the first step that a beginner would take is to understand
the relative value of the different chess pieces. A beginner’s book on chess might start by showing
the readers a short table like the following. If the total value of your pieces is more than the value of
your opponents pieces then you’re probably winning.
Queen
9 pts
Rook
5 pts
Bishop
3 pts
Knight
3 pts
Pawn
1 pts
Using this simple rule, a complete beginner at chess would expect to win more than half of their
games against another complete beginner who doesn’t know it. Obviously, in any undertaking as
complex as chess, one simple rule falls far short of complete understanding. As a beginner becomes
more advanced and progresses, they will learn new rules – as well as some exceptions to them. In
much the same way, we will begin with a few basic rules of winning Othello and then build on them.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
Corners Are Good
For beginning and intermediate players, games often revolve around battles for corners. As a first
step, let’s take a look at a classic example of how important corners are.

White To Play
Looking at the above position, a complete beginner might assume that black is winning by a large
margin. After all, black has 59 disks while white only has 1. Unfortunately, not very many of black’s
disks will remain black at the end of the game, in fact, in this position, white will get to play to all four
corners (because black will have no legal moves) and will win the game. It doesn’t matter what order
the moves are played in as they all result in the same finishing position. Let’s look at the moves as
they’re played.

WHITE PLAYS A1
WHITE PLAYS A8
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
WHITE PLAYS H8
WHITE PLAYS H1
White wins 40-24!
A reasonable question at this point might be - Why are corners important? The simple answer is that
a corner is a guaranteed stable disk because there are no moves that outflank a corner. A stable
disk is a disk that your opponent can never flip back to his or her color. Obviously, the more disks
you have that are guaranteed to be your color at the end of the game, the more likely you are to win
the game. Another great thing about corners is that you can use them to build more stable disks.
Let’s take a look at another fantasy board to demonstrate how stable disks can be built from corners.

WHITE T O PLAY
Here, white can create stable disks along either the A column or the 1 row by building off of the A1
corner. An example of this is on the next page.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
WHITE PLAYS E1
WHITE PLAYS A5
Note that the 9 white disks on the edge from A1-A5 and from A1-E1 are all stable – however, the
white disks on B4, C3, and D2, while they can’t be flipped in the current position, are not yet stable.
For instance, if white were to play F2 then black could play G2 which would flip the D2 disk. While
white is guaranteed a score of at least 9 at the end of the game, black has no stable disks at all. Let’s
take a look at an example illustrating how building off of corners will result in accumulating stable
disks.

BLACK T O PLAY
Black can play either A7 or H1 and get more stable disks. Following the rule that corners are very
valuable, we will build towards the corner at H1. White will then have to pass because white will have
no legal moves.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
BLACK PLAYS H1 – WHITE PASSES
BLACK PLAYS G2
Since we are building towards the H1 corner, we should try to consolidate the northeast region of the
board and fill it in with black disks, in the meantime, we are going to save the move to A7 (because it
won’t go away) until later. We’ll play G2 which forces white to play G3 because white has no other
valid moves.

WHITE PLAYS G3
BLACK PLAYS H3
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
After white plays G3, we’ll play H3 because this gives us 3 more stable disks and helps consolidate
even more of the northeast region to black. Again, we’ll leave white a move here. Often, when you’re
building you’ll need to leave moves for your opponent. Yes, white gets a disk at G3 and at H2 for the
moment, however, look how quickly, those disks both turn into stable disks for black in that region. By
forcing white to play there after black already has the corner to build off of, black can turn those disks
into stable black disks.

WHITE PLAYS H2
BLACK PLAYS H4
WHITE PLAYS H5
BLACK PLAYS H6
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
BLACK PLAYS G4
BLACK PLAYS G5
Let’s stop here and assess the situation. Black already has 31 stable disks and has guaranteed that
even if the 2 unstable black disks (D5 and E5) get flipped to white and white gets stable disks on the
rest of the squares (very unlikely), black will still only lose the game 33-31. If black were a
conservative player, black could play A7 next, which would give black 7 more stable disks and
guarantee at least a 38-26 win. Unfortunately for white, black doesn’t have to play A7 which “only”
wins 58-6 with perfect endgame play. Instead, black can play F7 which leads to a perfect play win by
wipeout for black. A wipeout is the term for when one player ends the game with zero disks left on
the board. In this game the final score after perfect play is 62-0 for black. Here’s a transcript that
shows the perfect endgame from the original starting position:
T RANSCRIPT OF WIPEOUT
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
Later in the book, I will refer to the process of winning a clearly won game as “a matter of technique”.
In the next few exercises I’m going to present you with the chance to win a few lopsided games to get
a feel for how to do it for yourself.
Exercises: For each of the following positions, set them up on a board (real or computer) and play
out a forcing sequence that leads to a wipeout win. Note that in many of these positions, there are
several sequences that lead to a wipeout and I’ve only provided what I consider the simplest solution.
If you find another way – good job!


White To Play

White To Play

White To Play
White To Play
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
Answers:




Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
A Few More Tips
While corners are good and building off of them is good, that only describes 4 squares on the board.
What else can we learn about the relative values of squares?
Exercise: Can you spot white’s two worst moves in the following position?

WHITE T O PLAY
Answer: B1 and B2 are white’s worst two moves.
Why? Let’s take a look at what the position would be after B1 and after B2:
AFTER B1
OR AFTER B2
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
In either case, black can now take the A1 corner! None of the other valid moves for white from the
starting position give black a corner on the very next turn. The thing we can learn from this is that the
squares adjacent to the corner are dangerous to play into. Othello terminology has special names for
these squares: C-squares and X-squares.

C-squares are adjacent to the corner on the
edge.
In the diagram to the left, the white disks are the
C-squares on the board.

X-squares are the squares that are adjacent to
the corner diagonally.
In the diagram to the left, the white squares are
the X-squares.

Now that we have the correct vocabulary, we can summarize what we’ve learned so far: corners are
good, while C-squares and X-squares are dangerous for us to play into because if we’re not careful,
our opponent will take a corner when we play into them. Even when there is no immediate threat of
your opponent taking the corner, it’s usually best to stay away from C-squares and X-squares. Let’s
take a look at a couple of examples:
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
BEFORE WHITE PLAYS G8
AFTER WHITE PLAYS G8
If white were to play G8, as diagrammed, black can’t immediately take the corner. However, at any
move after this, black can choose to play F8 and after that black will be able to take the H8 corner on
his or her next move.

BLACK PLAYS F8 AND WINS THE H8 CORNER
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
WHITE PLAYS H7
BLACK PLAYS H6
In the above diagram, white has just played H7. After black plays H6, black is guaranteed to win the
H8 corner. If white doesn’t take the disk at H6 by playing H5, black takes the corner. If white does
take the disk at H6 by playing H5, black will still have a disk at H4 and black can take the H8 corner
on the next turn.

WHITE PLAYS H5
BLACK PLAYS H8
This is not to say that all C-squares are bad. In both the above examples, notice how the C-squares
that were played aren’t adjacent to any other white edge disks. C-squares tend to be bad when they
are isolated. They aren’t as bad when you have disks adjacent to them on the edge.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Othello 101
For example: In the following diagram, the C-squares at B1 and G1 aren’t a liability for black because
there isn’t a way for white to attack them. In fact, as we’ll discuss later on, edges where you have 6
disks (B1 through G1 in this case) are one of the best edge formations you can have.

By not giving up corners (and avoiding playing into C-squares and X-squares which may result in
losing a corner) , taking corners – when they’re available, and building off of the corners that you do
get, you’ll beat almost every complete beginner that you meet.
Try playing a few games now and getting a better feel for how to apply these simple rules. You
should be able to hold your own with other beginners; however, you will find many players who have
advanced beyond this level. Don’t be discouraged by this, it isn’t completely unexpected. After all,
I’ve only talked about one basic rule of the game, and what you do when there aren’t any corner
moves available has to have some impact on the result of the game, right?

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
More Othello Concepts
Greed is One of the Seven Deadly Sins
In the last section, I talked about the importance of corners. Obviously, corners aren’t available at the
beginning of the game. What you really want to know next is: what other rules can I follow during the
rest of the game so that I have a chance at beating more than just beginners? If you followed my
advice and played a few games with some beginning and intermediate players, you may have started
to notice a pattern.
Let’s take a look at a sample position:
BLACK T O PLAY
What assets does white have in the above position? He’s got a lot of pieces, certainly. To the
untrained eye, it might even look like white is way ahead (after all, white has more pieces!). But if you
look more closely, while it’s black’s turn to move, white only has 2 legal moves in the above position.
And what’s worse BOTH of those moves will let black have the corner shortly afterwards. From the
last section, we know that that has to be bad news for white. Luckily for white – black has to play a
move here. Black has lots of choices, from the absolutely horrendous G2 (giving up a corner) to B5 to
E1. If black were to play B5 here, white would then play A5 or B6 (as the other 3 legal moves in the
position would give away a corner).

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
BLACK PLAYS B5
WHITE PLAYS A5
That hasn’t made any progress for black and it is black’s turn to move again. What if black played A5
here instead? White would respond A6 (because black would then be threatening to take the corner
by playing along the A edge if white were to play B5).

BLACK PLAYS A5
WHITE PLAYS A6
This also doesn’t accomplish much. Unfortunately for white, black has a much better move here,E1.
After E1, white STILL has the same 2 moves that lose the corner.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
BLACK PLAYS E1
I like to call moves like E1 the killer move because after this the game is effectively over and it turns
into a process of getting the corner in the best way and building from there. Similarly, there are often
sequences of 2 or more moves that win immediately and I call those killer sequences.
In Othello terminology, a quiet move is a move that doesn’t disturb the position very much. On the
other hand, a loud move is a move that changes the position significantly. In fact, in the above
example E1 is a Perfectly Quiet Move because it flips exactly 1 disk and it provides no new moves to
the opponent (therefore it’s as quiet as any legal move in Othello can be – it doesn’t change the board
very much at all). To clarify a bit more, your opponent will have the same (or fewer) moves both
before and after you play a Perfectly Quiet Move. In the above example, before black plays E1,
white can play to B1 and B2. After black plays to E1, white STILL can only play to B1 and B2. As a
general rule, if there is a perfectly quiet move on the board it is almost always the right move to play.
What can we learn from the above position? With good play, you can force your opponent to give you
corners – even if they’ve discovered how valuable corners are and they are also avoiding playing into
X-squares and C-squares. The real question is: how do you get into positions where your opponent
will have to give you a corner?
Let’s take a look at another example:
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
BLACK TO PLAY
Black can play the perfectly quiet move to H6 after which white can respond by playing 4 ways: H2,
H3, G2, G1.

BLACK PLAYS H6
We can be pretty sure that white isn’t going to play G1 as that immediately gives black a corner.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
IF WHITE PLAYED G1
H3 might appear good, but after H3 black can play H2 and white will be forced to play G2 or G1 –
both of which lose the corner.

IF WHITE PLAYS H3
BLACK PLAYS H2
G2 isn’t much better than H3. In fact the only way that white can try to hold on is to play H2, a
dangerous (but necessary) C-square. After black plays C1 in response, white will have to play E1 or

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
IF WHITE PLAYS H2
BLACK PLAYS E1
White only has these 2 moves that don’t give up the corner – both are on the north edge. No matter
which of these moves to the north edge that white plays next, black will play the other. If white plays
D1, black will play E1, and vice versa, we call such moves paired – when the obvious response to a
move is another move and vice versa. After the move pair is played out, white will be forced to give
up the H1 corner on his next turn.

IF WHITE PLAYS D1
BLACK PLAYS E1
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
IF WHITE PLAYS E1
BLACK PLAYS D1
So if it’s black’s turn, white will lose. What about if it’s white’s turn? White could play H3 ,making a
black move to H6 pointless (White just plays H7 after H6), however then black will just play E1
instead, forcing white to play D1 and then black will play C1 forcing white to lose a corner.
Obviously, whatever it is about the previous starting positions that is bad, it carries over no matter
whose turn it is. In order to figure out how to force our opponents to give us corners, we need to
figure out what features the two diagrammed positions have in common. White’s real problem in both
positions is that he doesn’t really have a lot of options to begin with and the options that he has aren’t
very good. When you have lots of moves to choose from you are said to “have lots of mobility”.
When you don’t have many moves to choose from you are “low on mobility”. Having good mobility
(having good moves) is a very important part of the game. If you have a lot of mobility – at least a few
of those moves are bound to be good. And the opposite is true, if you don’t have very many moves –
you might not have any good moves at all.
Many games between an expert and a beginner are decided in terms of mobility alone. The expert
quickly runs the beginner out of good moves, and then forces the beginner to give up a corner (by
leaving the beginner one or two moves that both lose a corner) and from there it’s all a matter of
technique.
Why doesn’t white have much mobility in the above diagrams? Because black doesn’t have a lot of
disks., Obviously if black only has 3 or 4 disks, white will probably have only 2 or 3 moves. If those 2
or 3 moves are all moves that give away a corner, then black is probably going to win. The point I’m
trying to make here is that by having fewer disks, you can get into positions where your opponent is
forced to give you a corner. Having fewer disks is actually better most of the time!
Unfortunately, this can be a very difficult lesson to learn. The “goal” of the game is to get the most
disks, right? Wrong. The goal of the game is to have the most disks at the end of the game. We’ve
already seen how having corners leads to stable disks and we know that stable disks lead to more
disks at the end of the game. In between the start and the end of the game, our goal is to put
ourselves into a position where we’re likely to have the most disks at the end of the game. If this
means having fewer disks in the opening and midgame, then so be it.
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
Exercises: Now that we’ve seen a little bit about how we can force our opponents to give us a corner
– these exercises will help us find the killer moves that are necessary to get the job done. Find a
move or short sequence that forces your opponent to give you a corner. Note that in most of these
positions there are multiple answers. I’ve picked the shortest killer sequence as the answers. If you
found another forced sequence, good job!


Black To Play

Black To Play

Black To Play
Black To Play
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
Answers:




Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
Exercises: Find the Perfectly Quiet Move in each of the following positions:


BLACK TO PLAY

BLACK TO PLAY

BLACK OR WHITE TO PLAY
WHITE TO PLAY
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
Answers:
1. F4
2. H5
3. C6 is a Perfectly Quiet Move for BOTH players
4. H4
Don’t leave yourself high and dry
Let’s say that your opponent is trying to maximize their disks. At some point in the game, you’re likely
to get wiped out if you completely commit yourself to minimizing your disks. The term for this situation
is overevaporation. Unfortunately, you can’t always focus on just minimizing your disks,you
sometimes have to pay attention to make sure that you’re not going to wipe out. Remember having
fewer disks is a means to forcing your opponent to give you corners, it is not an end in and of itself.
In order to avoid being wiped out by someone who is playing greedily, you’ll want to try to play moves
that do 1 of 3 things (in this order of importance):
Establish a stronghold on an edge that your opponent can’t flip
Play a move that flips disks in more than one direction at once
Play a move that makes a line that is not immediately reflippable.
Let’s take a look at examples of each of these in turn.
Establish a stronghold on an edge that your opponent can’t flip
Edge disks are harder to flip than regular disks as they can only be flipped by other disks on the edge,
instead of in 8 different ways like all the other disks. By establishing a stronghold on the edge and not
letting your opponent flip those disks, you guarantee yourself that you’ll have some disks to play off of
later in the game.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
BLACK TO PLAY
BLACK PLAYS H5
In the above example, black could play moves like E7 or E2 that immediately get wiped out. For
instance, if black played E7 white would play E8. In order to avoid being wiped out, black can try to
establish a stronghold on an edge that White will never be able to flip. For instance, if black were to
play H5, then white can never take black off of the edge because no matter where white plays along
the edge, black can just capture along the edge and protect his stronghold.

WHITE PLAYS H4
BLACK PLAYS H3
For instance, if white tries to get on the edge with H4, black will just take the edge with H3. As long as
white can’t take black’s edge disks, black can’t be wiped out. Notice that in the original diagram black
had several other possible edge moves (A5, H4, H7), however, H5 is the quietest move and it leaves
white with the fewest options (in fact , it’s an easy win for black), and that makes H5 the correct
choice.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
Flip in more than one direction at once
If you are dangerously low on disks, flipping more disks will help you avoid being wiped out. That is
one of the reasons that flipping in more than one direction at once is good. You tend to flip more
disks when you flip in more than one direction. Also, your opponent can never wipe you out on the
move immediately following a move in which you’ve flipped in more than one direction.

Black To Move
Black Plays B4
In the above position, establishing a stronghold on the edge by playing C8 doesn’t work because then
white plays E8 and neither player has any more legal moves (and thus white wins). Obviously
another idea is in order. An example safe move is for black to play B4 which flips disks in 2
directions. After this move, white can’t wipe black out during his or her next move.

Make a line that is not immediately reflippable
Obviously if a line is not immediately reflippable then your opponent can’t wipe you out on the next
move. Making a non-reflippable line is usually a delaying tactic that you will use until you can play
moves that meet one of the two above criteria.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
BLACK TO PLAY
BLACK PLAYS C7
In the above example, if it were white’s move, white would play H2 or G2 and wipe black out. Since
black has no moves that establish a stronghold on an edge – nor does he have any moves that flip in
more than one direction at once, black’s only reasonable moves are ones that makes a line that white
can’t immediately reflip. In this case there are 2 moves that meet our criteria - C7 and G7. Obviously
black doesn’t want to give white the corner so black should play C7 here. The move to C7 forms a
line between C7 and G3 that white cannot immediately reflip the next turn. Now, regardless of what
white plays, black will have moves like H6 and B4 next move which will avoid being wiped out.
What’s in an edge
Let’s take a look at another position and see what we can learn from it:
BLACK TO PLAY
Othello: From Beginner to Master – More Othello Concepts
So you’re looking at the position on the last page and you’re wondering “OK, black has a lot fewer
disks and white has very poor mobility. How does black win a corner?” The answer is: black can’t win
a corner in this position (at least – not in the next couple of moves). What’s different about this
position? Because of black’s disk placement, white only has one “dangerous” move that he could
play if it were his turn, A2. It is very easy for white to avoid playing to A2. Let’s play fantasy Othello
for a bit and move one disk on the board slightly:
BLACK TO PLAY
Now black does have a move that wins a corner (black plays B1 and white must play B2). You should
notice that in the second diagram, the disk that previously was in the middle of the board is now on
the edge. In fact, in all of the winning positions that were presented in the last chapter as examples
(and in the current example as well), all of the correct moves for black to play (because they force
white to lose a corner) were edge moves. As mentioned in the last chapter, edge disks can only be
flipped along the edge so this means that edge moves tend to be quieter than non-edge moves.
Quieter moves give your opponent fewer options the next turn. Eventually if you can play enough
quiet edge moves, your opponent will run out of other moves and have to give you a corner. This
simple strategy is known as edge creeping because you are attempting to creep slowly along the
edge until you win a corner.
Another thing that you should notice is that in the original diagram, the black disk is on the outside of
the mass of white disks where it could be flipped – which means that white has a couple of possible
moves to begin with. Disks that are on the outside of a mass of opposite colored disks that can be
flipped are called frontier disks. The edge disk in the second example isn’t a frontier disk at the
current time because it can’t be flipped. In the future, white may get a disk at D1 or black could play
to D1 in which case C1 would become a frontier disk. Since every frontier disk provides your
opponent with a potential move, having,fewer frontier disks mean that you have a better position.
Now that I’ve set some general guidelines, we’ll spend the next few chapters exploring the three
phases of the game: the opening, the midgame, and the endgame. We’ll look at how to apply these
guidelines to the three phases of the game as well as when these guidelines no longer apply.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Opening Advice
Simple Opening Advice
Understanding is the key
More of the same
A few new ideas
Pay attention!
In chess, one of the biggest mistakes that I feel that beginning players make is to assign too much
importance to the openings. They feel that better players are “tricking them” by being better prepared
in the openings. So, they rush out and buy a book of openings and start memorizing them. While I
feel that having an opening repertoire is useful for a more seasoned player, it is much more important
for a beginner to understand the WHY of an opening. When you memorize openings without
understanding why you are making the moves, the instant you venture into unfamiliar territory, you are
likely to blunder. What I do recommend is to keep your eyes open and trying to learn from your
mistakes.
Do you keep making the same kinds of moves and keep getting into bad positions because of them?
I know it sounds obvious, but figure out what it is that you’re doing wrong and try not to do it anymore.
Thinking about what concepts and ideas do work and what ones don’t work will help you all the way
from beginner through master.
Now that I’ve encouraged you to experiment and discover openings on your own, I’ll try to give some
general advice about what you should be trying to accomplish during an opening. Much of what I
have to say is similar to the advice that I’ve given in the previous sections but it doesn’t hurt to reiterate it here.
Try not to take too many disks.
Try to head for the edges.
Try to limit your frontier.
Don’t play into X-squares or C-squares where you’re putting yourself in a dangerous position.
In addition to these basic concepts, there are a few new concepts I’d like to introduce here as well.
The first concept I’d like to introduce is the Sweet 16 – this term refer to the central 16 squares of the
board:
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Opening Advice
T HE SWEET SIXTEEN
In the opening it’s generally better to play a move into the Sweet 16 than another move elsewhere on
the board. It also stands to reason that preventing your opponent from getting moves into the Sweet
16 is also a good thing. Disks played in the sweet 16 don’t let your opponent reach an edge (where
they may try to edge creep). Additionally, disks in the Sweet 16 are less likely to remain frontier disks
during the course of a game.

Another useful rule is that staying in the middle of
your opponent’s disks is good.
This is called staying central.
Notice that white only has two frontier disks (B4
and B4) in this position because white’s disks are
central to black’s disks. As we discovered in the
last section, having fewer frontier disks is usually
a good thing.

Another good idea is to stay compact. Being compact means that you don’t want your disks spread
out all over the place. You definitely don’t want spaces in between your disks because those squares
are very likely places for your opponent to play to stay central to your disks. Notice how in the
previous example all of white’s disks are in one big clump while black’s disks are almost cut in two by
white’s disks. In the example, white is compact and black isn’t. Staying compact also tends to lead to
fewer frontier disks.
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Opening Advice
BLACK TO PLAY
BLACK PLAYS C4
One good way to stay compact, central, and to avoid having a lot of frontier disks is to play a move
that reflips one of the disks that your opponent just flipped. For example, in the above diagram, white
has just played to C3. Black responds by reflipping the disk at D4 by playing to C4. After this move,
black is both central and compact.
Before I close out this chapter let’s take a look at a common mistake that I see beginners make very
often that emphasizes the necessity of staying central and compact.

WHITE TO PLAY
The above diagram can be reached by playing E6, F4, E3 – we are 3 moves into the game. White
has 4 options here, however, only one of them is any good.
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Opening Advice
AFTER D2
AFTER F2
D2 and F2 – D2 and F2 only flip one disk but they have several other drawbacks. They’re not in the
Sweet 16 and they’re not central either, in fact, either D2 or F2 will become frontier disks in typical
continuations from this position. They aren’t compact – as white is leaving “holes” in his position for
black to play into. After playing D2, white has a “hole” at D2 that is very tempting for black to play
into. After F2, there is a “hole” at F3 that is very tempting to play into (though at the moment black
can’t play to that square).

AFTER F6
BLACK PLAYS F5
F6 – This move also only flips one disk, however, black immediately responds with F5 thus reflipping
the disk that was just flipped. In fact, F5 is a perfectly quiet move for black and after playing F5 black
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Opening Advice
is very central and compact while white is spread out along the frontier. Yes , black has more disks
but because of where they are white’s position is not very good at all.

AFTER D6
D6 – This move flips two disks, which isn’t a lot in the grand scheme of things (it may seem like a lot
because there aren’t many disks to begin with). While D6 does flip more disks than what the other
moves flip, after D6 white is both central and compact while black is stuck on the outside. D6 is the
clearly the best move in this position.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
Simple Midgame Advice
It’s all about mobility
Tempo
As we’ve noticed in the previous sections, having and keeping mobility is a very important thing.
When you run out of mobility it’s very likely that your opponent is going to force you to give up a
corner and they will win. In the midgame, your job is usually to avoid running out of mobility while
retaining a good position and trying to run your opponent out of mobility in return. Often, you will find
that there are moves that you are forced to play or your opponent will run you out of mobility. Most of
the time when I refer to a move as being a forced move, it means that the move must be played to
prevent the other player from attaining a killer sequence. Obviously, if there is only one valid move on
the board it is also a forced move. Let’s take a look at a position where one of the players has a
forced move.

BLACK TO PLAY
In the above position, white is already way ahead on mobility but black isn’t dead just yet. While white
is certainly winning he or she should still have to work to finish off the game if black plays accurately.
However, black’s next move is forced. Black MUST play B1 here. If black doesn’t play B1 then white
will take the edge with G1 next turn. To understand why, let’s take a look at what happens if black
plays a different move.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
BLACK PLAYS H6 – WHITE PLAYS G1
If black plays H6 then white responds with G1. Black is then forced to play G6 next (as it’s the only
legal move) to which white responds B1 and then black must play an X-square. If, in the original
position, black takes the edge by playing B1, his position isn’t exactly desirable, but he survives a
while longer and gives white the opportunity to make a mistake.

BLACK PLAYS G6 – WHITE PLAYS B1
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
In the example, both players can take the north edge with a gain of tempo. We say that a player has
gained a tempo when they play a move or a sequence of moves that gain them an additional safe
move without giving their opponent any new safe moves. Additionally, after white has played to G1,
B1 becomes a safe move for white and playing B1 doesn’t create any new safe moves for black.
Thus white has gained two tempo via this sequence. Very often, the moves that are the most likely to
be forced are moves that we have to play in order to prevent our opponent from gaining too many
tempo. In fact, there are times when it is possible to win 3 or 4 tempo with proper play! Let’s take a
look at an example.

BLACK TO PLAY
BLACK PLAYS C1
In this diagram, the move to C1 is the first tempo that is won in a sequence that wins 4 tempo for
black! Even if white could somehow pass for the next 3 moves, black would still be in good shape.
Let’s take a look at this fictional “game” where black plays the next 3 moves and uses up all of his or
her spare tempo.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
BLACK PLAYS F1
BLACK PLAYS B1
BLACK PLAYS G1
Another common example of a forced move is when your opponent is threatening to take a corner
and you have to play a certain move to prevent that from happening. Let’s look at an example:
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
WHITE TO PLAY
WHITE PLAYS A6
In the above picture, while white has many possible moves, white is forced to play A6 even though
this move flips a lot of black disks and almost eliminates black’s frontier. If white doesn’t take the
edge, black wins the A1 corner and wins the game convincingly.
From the above examples, it’s easy to see that a lot of times we will be forced to take edges in order
to prevent our opponent from gaining enough tempo to run us out of mobility or to prevent them from
taking corners.
Often, when we’re looking for a killer sequence, we are looking for a way to win a single tempo
because if we win a single tempo our opponent runs out of safe moves.

BLACK TO PLAY
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
In the example, while white has no safe moves at the moment, every black move gives white more
safe moves to play. For instance, if black plays F7 then white can safely play to F8. In fact, if black
could pass here, he would win because white would be forced to give him the H1 corner. Fortunately,
black has a forcing sequence that wins a tempo which in many cases is the same as passing. If black
plays D1 then white will be forced to play B1 to protect the H1 corner. Black can then win the game
by playing F2 forcing white to lose the H1 corner.

BLACK PLAYS D1
WHITE PLAYS B1 (FORCED)
BLACK PLAYS F2 AND WINS
Because Othello is a game where you often want to pass in order to improve your position , winning
tempo from your opponent and not losing any tempo in return will often go a long way towards
winning a game.
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
Exercises:


BLACK TO PLAY AND GAIN T EMPO

WHAT IS WHITE’S FORCED NEXT MOVE?


WHITE TO PLAY AND WIN
WHITE TO PLAY AND WIN
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Midgame Advice
Answers:
1. Black plays G1.
2. White plays B1 (otherwise Black wins tempo with G1 and then B1).


Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Simple Endgame Advice
Build on what you already know
More is More
Rules are made to be broken …
Now it’s time to finish off your opponent with a flourish. The corners that your opponent had to give
you are now turning into anchors from which you’ll build your empire. The first order of business is to
consolidate to your color as many disks near your corner as possible. As disks near your corner are
captured, more and more of them will become stable. If your position is good enough, you’ll even
have a chance to build in a way that will force your opponent to give you another corner. After taking
that second corner, you can consolidate around it as well. Let’s look at a quick example:
STARTING POSITION
BLACK PLAYS G3
There are several ways to consolidate disks near the H8 corner – because the disk at G6 is closer to
H8 than any of the other white disks, we’ll play G3 – which flips that disk in the least disruptive way
possible. Notice that D3 would also flip the G6 disk – however, after G3, white has 2 options, after
D3, white has 6 options. Once your have your opponent under control, its better if you keep them
under control and limit what they can do. The more options they have, the more complicated the
position will become and the more complicated the position is, the easier it is to make a mistake that
will lose disks. While black isn’t in any danger of losing after D3, white may be able to salvage 15-20
disks if black plays inaccurately. However, after G3 white is still in danger of being wiped out, even if
black makes a few minor errors. It’s also much easier to calculate ahead when your opponent only
has one or two options because then you can concentrate on finding your best moves instead of
having to worry about them fighting back.
After G3, white has 2 options, H3 and H2. Let’s look at both:
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
WHITE PLAYS H3
BLACK PLAYS H2
WHITE PLAYS H2
BLACK PLAYS C7
If white plays H3, then black plays H2. White has to play G2 the next move and black will easily take
the northeast corner. If white plays H2, then black plays C7 and then white is forced to play H3 also
giving up the corner. After taking the northeast corner, black will consolidate around that corner as
well and will have an overwhelming advantage.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Exercises: In the following diagrams, find a wipeout sequence. In most of the puzzles there is more
than one wipeout sequence but only one solution is given, if you find another - good job! I’ve
deliberately made these exercises quite a bit harder than the previous ones on building. In fact, I had
a lot of trouble with the #3 and #4 myself! These more difficult puzzles are meant to hone your skills
to the point that they’re razor sharp. With a little more practice, winning this type of position will
become second nature to you.


Black To Play

Black To Play

Black To Play
Black To Play
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Answers:




Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Counting and Basic Endgame Theory
Of course, building is only going to help when you’re way ahead. At some point in a closer game you
have to remember that you want to have the most disks at the end and more importantly the end is
getting near. You are trying to keep the number of disks that you have to a small number as
suggested in the previous sections, right?
Obviously, at the end of the game, keeping your disks to a minimum is not as good of an idea. You
have to start playing moves that take a lot of disks. Usually, in a fairly even game, this is when there
are about 8 or 10 empty squares on the board. Unfortunately there’s no hard or fast rule for when you
should start taking a lot of disks, however, if you can take a lot of disks and most are stable or they
make other disks that you have stable, then it is probably a good idea.

BLACK TO PLAY
We’ll start with the simple example shown above. We’re at the last 2 moves of the game – so this
should be easy. This process of calculating the best play sequence is called counting. Counting is a
difficult skill to master and there are many strategies for it. I prefer to simply employ a plus minus
count of disks and see which sequence is “optimal”.
Let’s count black’s move to A1 first. Black plays A1, that’s +5 black disks. White Plays A2 (flipping
B2), that’s -1 black disk. So +5 – 1 = +4 black disks. The sequence where black plays A1 ends up
with 4 more disks than in the original position. That’s not bad.
Just to be on the safe side, let’s check and make sure that the move to A2 doesn’t get more disks.
Black plays A2 and gets +9 black disks. White plays A1 and flips B2 and A2, that’s -2 black disks. +9
– 2 = +7 black disks!
So, taking the corner in this case is the wrong move. In fact, if we count the disks currently on the
board, black has 26 disks. 26 + 4 = 30. Black loses 30-34 if he takes the corner. 26 + 7 = 33. Black
wins 33-31 if he plays A2. The difference between winning and losing is in understanding why this is
the case. For one thing, the move to A2 simply flips more disks. With only 1 move left, white can’t
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
flip enough of them back to make the corner worth very much. Remember, the reason that corners
are important is that they tend to lead to stable disks. Here, there isn’t anywhere for white to build off
of, so the corner isn’t worth very much. What we can learn from this fiasco is that rules are meant to
be broken and that corners become worth less late in the game because there are fewer opportunities
left to build from them.

BLACK TO PLAY
In the above example, Black has 3 choices. Obviously A2 (giving up the corner for no reason) isn’t
helpful, so let’s look at the other 2 options and how they play out.
B1 - After B1, white is forced to play to B2. The position after B1 B2 should look familiar because it is
the position from the previous example! After B1 B2, Black would play A2, winning 33-31.
B2 – This flips 14 disks and many of them become stable.
If White Plays B1 (-3) – Black Plays A1 (+2) then White Plays A2.(-2) –
+14 -3 +2 -2 = +11
If White Plays A2 (-1) then Black Passes
If White Plays A1 (-5) then Black plays B1 (+3)
+14 -1 -5 +3 = +11
If White Plays A2 (-4) then Black Plays A1 (+3)
+14 -1 -4 +3 = +13
If White Plays A1 (-5)
If Black Plays B1 (+2) then White Plays A2 (-1)
+14 -5 +2 -1 = +10
If Black Plays A2 (+2) then White Plays B1 (-3)
+14 -5 +2 -3 = +8
After all this calculation, we see that the best sequence after B2 is A1 B1 A2. +10. In the original
position, Black has 25 disks. This means that with perfect play black will win 35-29. Since 35-29 is
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
better than 33-31, B2 is the best move for black in the example position. Clearly being greedy and
playing B2 and flipping a lot of disks works out well in this position.

Before we get too greedy and always start playing the move that flips the most disks on the board
let’s take a look at the above position.
If Black Plays A1 (+2) – White plays A2 (-1) = +1
If Black Plays A2 (+9) – White plays A1 (-10) = -1
Oops! Even though the move to A2 flips more disks, it’s the wrong move. By playing to A2, black lets
white flip all the disks on the A1-H8 diagonal as well as all the new black disks on the A edge.
One of the most difficult parts of Othello is playing proper endgames because at times the right
sequence is nearly impossible to see without counting every possible variation, and that quickly
becomes impossible, even for master level players. Even top human players make endgame errors,
however, the errors that they make tend to be small (2 or 4 disks) and they tend get a lot of the moves
right. On the other hand, I’ve watched games between beginners where both players trade endgame
errors that are 8 to 10 disks wrong at almost every move.
One important rule we can follow when counting is to know that in almost all cases, if we have a
sequence in which we get all of the remaining moves, it will probably be the best sequence.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
WHITE TO PLAY
If I were to sit down at the above game I would immediately play A1 as white. After playing A1, black
is forced to pass. Then white plays B2 as well. If white were to play B2 first, black would be able to
play A1. If I can get all the disks I would get by playing B2 AND all the disks from playing A1, it has to
be better than just getting the disks from playing B2 (-2 because black flips the A2 and B2 disks when
he plays A1). If we were to sit down and count this position. We would find out that A1 wins 39-25
while B2 loses 30-34.

BLACK TO PLAY
If I were to sit down at the above game I would immediately play A1, Pass, B1, Pass, H8 and I get all
3 moves. Clearly, playing B1 isn’t good as white just plays A1 and black doesn’t get the A1-H8
diagonal. If black were to play H8 first and then A1 white would just play B1 because the B2 disk
would get flipped. Without even bothering to count I know that A1 then B1 then H8 has to be best.

Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Exercises: Because people DO make errors, even with 3 or 4 empty – it is in your best interest to
learn how to play simple endgames correctly. Not only will you win close games that are “won” for
you, you’ll also win some close games where your opponent will make a mistake or miscount. In the
following exercises, find the winning sequence.


BLACK TO PLAY

WHITE TO PLAY

WHITE TO PLAY
WHITE TO PLAY
Othello: From Beginner to Master – Simple Endgame Advice
Answers:


BLACK WINS 33-31

WHITE WINS 33-31

WHITE WINS 33-31
WHITE WINS 40-24
Othello:
A Minute to Learn...
A Lifetime to Master
Brian Rose
Othello and A Minute to Learn...A lifetime to Master are Registered
Acknowledgments
Much of this book is based on material which appeared in Othello Quarterly.
Thanks to the current and previous editors: Eddie Williams, Jonathan Cerf, George
Sullivan, Ted Landau, Clarence Hewlett. Special thanks to David Parsons for his
tremendous support of Othello in general and this book in particular.
All of the diagrams in this book were produced with WZebra. Thanks to Gunnar
Andersson for making several modifications to the program on my behalf.
Thanks to Jonathan Cerf for making many suggestions which greatly improved
the book, and for buying me lunch so many times over the years.
Takeshi Murakami introduced me to many of the ideas in Chapter 13 and offered
some examples used in the book. Thanks for everything, Takeshi.
Most of the puzzles which appear in Chapter 15 were created by George Sullivan,
David Toth, Jonathan Cerf, Geoffrey Hamilton, Philip Greenberg, Olivier Thill (including my favorites, Puzzles 84 through 90), David Shaman, and last but never least,
Iago Sangria.
Thanks to the founding members of the US Othello Association: Mark Weinberg,
Jonathan Cerf, Mitch Soulliard, John Stoner, George Sullivan, Richard Levy, and
Roger Richards.
Thanks to Philip Greenberg and Bill Roman for introducing me to the game.
Thanks to the Toth family for running the first tournament that I ever attended,
and making it so much fun that I wanted to come back for more.
Thanks to Goro Hasegawa, the inventor of Othello, and the Becker family for
introducing the game to the world.

Acknowledgments
Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Part I
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Rules and notation
Corners and stable discs
Frontier discs and walls
Introduction to openings
Basic edge play
Basic endgame strategy
Playing defense
Part II
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Even number theory
Tesuji Part I
Tesuji Part II
Book openings
Advanced midgame play
Endgame counting
Becoming an expert
Puzzles
Game analysis
Appendix
Internet resources
Answers to Exercises
Glossary
Contents
Contents
Introduction
This is the most comprehensive book ever published on Othello strategy. Authored
by the 2001 World Othello Champion, this book was written for anyone, from novice
to expert, who wants to get better at Othello. Starting with a review of the rules, it
builds up step by step from the basics of strategy to the advanced concepts used by
experts. Whether you are looking for some help to win against your family or friends,
or you hope to become the next World Champion, this book will help you win at
Othello.
Part I (Chapters 1-7) of the book is written primarily with beginning and intermediate players in mind. It is meant to be read from beginning to end, with each
chapter building on the previous ones. Part II (Chapters 8-16) covers more advanced
material; these chapters can be read in any order. Exercises appear at the end of most
chapters. Some of these exercises will be difficult for novice players, but my hope is
that the answers will provide you with further insights into good strategy. The Appendix shows where to find resources related to Othello on the Internet.
Chapter 1 reviews the rules of Othello and introduces the notation used in this
book. While I expect that most readers will be familiar with the rules, I would encourage you to at least quickly read through this chapter, which explains the notation used
throughout the book.
Chapter 2 discusses the most basic strategies in Othello, namely taking corners
and making stable discs. Knowing these strategies is critical to understanding the
strategies which follow in rest of the book.
Chapter 3 covers the basic strategy which can force your opponent to give you
corners and stable discs. Understanding this material can immediately give a tremendous boost to your playing strength.
Chapter 4 introduces openings and expands on some of the ideas in Chapter 3.
Chapter 5 will show you how to play the edges, where making a mistake can
easily cost you the game. Two critical concepts, pairs and tempos, are introduced.
Chapter 6 covers basic endgame strategy. Even for experts, the endgame is the
hardest part of the game, and this chapter emphasizes winning in the easiest manner
possible. The more difficult material on endgames appear in Chapters 8 and 13.
Chapter 7 discusses defensive plays, designed to prevent your opponent from
making the sort of good moves that you are aiming for yourself.
Chapter 8 explores even number theory, also known as parity, which can make
it much easier to find the right moves in the endgame. Using even number theory
correctly is not easy, but it is important for anyone aspiring to become an expert.

Introduction
Chapters 9 and 10 cover “tesuji”, good moves that arise in certain positions
which occur frequently enough to merit special attention. Chapter 9 discusses corner
attack tesujis, while Chapter 10 examines swindles and other tesujis.
Chapter 11 discusses how to build your opening book. This chapter is designed
mainly for players striving to become experts.
Chapter 12 looks at midgame strategies at an advanced level. While some of
this material is challenging, intermediate and advanced players should find something useful in the chapter.
Chapter 13 goes into depth about how to count discs in the last few moves of
the game. This chapter is by far the most difficult in the book, but even intermediate
players should be able to understand the first section which explains how to count
just the last two moves of the game.
Chapter 14 offers suggestions on how to become an expert at Othello. In particular, I highly recommend playing in over-the-board tournaments, where you can
meet fellow Othello fans in face-to-face competition.
Chapter 15 contains “take-a-corner” puzzles. These puzzles are an excellent
way to improve your ability to look ahead and have fun at the same time!
Chapter 16 analyzes a game from the finals of the 2003 World Othello Championship, showing how the various elements discussed in the book combine in a full
game between the two best players in the world.
The Appendix shows where to find resources related to Othello on the Internet.

viii
Introduction
Chapter 1
Rules and notation
Diagram 1-1 shows the standard notation for Othello. The columns are labeled
‘a’ through ‘h’ from left to right, and the rows are labeled ‘1’ through ‘8’ from top to
bottom. In this book, squares will be referenced using a small letter followed by a
number, e.g., ‘a1’ for the upper-left corner and ‘h8’ for the lower-right corner. Certain
squares are assigned special letters, which will be capitalized, as shown in Diagram
1-2. This notation was developed by Othello’s inventor, Goro Hasegawa, and remains in use today. The B-squares are in the center of the edge, the C-squares are on
the edge next to the corner, and the A-squares lie between the B-squares and Csquares. The X-squares are diagonally adjacent to the corners, with the ‘X’ indicating
danger.
a1 b1 c1 d1 e1 f1 g1 h1
a2 b2 c2 d2 e2 f2 g2 h2
a3 b3 c3 d3 e3 f3 g3 h3
a4 b4 c4 d4 e4 f4 g4 h4
a5 b5 c5 d5 e5 f5 g5 h5
a6 b6 c6 d6 e6 f6 g6 h6
a7 b7 c7 d7 e7 f7 g7 h7
a8 b8 c8 d8 e8 f8 g8 h8
Diagram 1-1
C A B B A C
Diagram 1-2
Square names
C A B B A C
Diagram 1-3
Black to move
Black and White, written with capital letters, will refer to the players, while
lowercase letters (black and white) will refer to the color of the discs. For example:
“at the end of the game there were more black discs than white discs, so Black won
and White lost”. Black and White are referred to as “he”, although they could of
course be “she”, as many women play Othello, including Carol Jacobs, who won the
U.S. Othello Championship twice in a row.
Compass directions (north, south, east, west) are sometimes used to refer to
areas of the board (top, bottom, right, and left, respectively).

Rules and notation
Rules of the game
1. The game begins with black discs on d5 and e4, and white discs on d4 and e5, as
shown in Diagram 1-3.
2. Players alternate taking turns, with Black moving first.
3. A legal move consists of placing a new disc on an empty square, and flipping
one or more of the opponent’s discs.
4. Any of the opponent’s pieces which are ‘sandwiched’ between the disc just placed
on the board and a disc of the same color already on the board should be flipped.
Sandwiches can be formed vertically, horizontally, or diagonally. To form a sandwich, all of the squares between the new disc and the disc of the same color
already on the board must be occupied by the opponent’s pieces, with no blank
squares in between.
5. Pieces may be flipped in several directions on the same move. Any pieces which
are caught in a sandwich must be flipped; the player moving does not have the
right to choose to not flip a disc.
6. A new disc can not be played unless at least one of the opponent’s discs is
flipped. If a player has no legal moves, that is, if no matter where the player
places a new disc he could not flip at least one disc, that player passes his turn,
and his opponent continues to make consecutive moves until a legal move becomes available to that player.
7. If a player has at least one legal move available, he must make a move and may
not pass his turn.
8. The game continues until the board is completely filled or neither player has a
legal move.
Scoring
Scoring is done at the end of game. The usual way to determine the score is to
simply count the number of discs of each color, e.g., if there are 34 black discs and 30
white discs, then Black wins 34-30. If both players have the same number of discs,
then the game is a draw.
In tournament play, if one player captures all of his opponents discs, the game is
usually scored as a 64-0 victory for that player, regardless of the number of discs on
the board. Further, in certain tournaments, such as the World Championship, empty
squares are awarded to the winner. For example, if at the end of the game there are 32
black discs and 29 white discs, with 3 empty squares, the score is recorded as a 35-29
victory for Black.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Examples
Diagrams 1-4 through 1-9 show a sequence of moves at the start of the game to
demonstrate the rules. In Diagram 1-4, Black makes the first move of the game to
f5, sandwiching the white disc on e5 between this new disc and the black disc on
d5. In the diagram, the numeral 1 on the disc on f5 indicates that this is where the
first move is played. The diamond-shaped black disc on e5 indicates that this disc
was white before the move, and was flipped as the result of Black’s move. Below
the diagram, the phrase ‘White to move’ indicates that White will make the next
move in the game. In Diagram 1-5, White plays to f6, sandwiching the disc on e5
diagonally using the existing white disc on d4. In Diagram 1-7, White plays to f4,
flipping discs in two directions. The black disc on f5 is sandwiched between the
new disc on f4 and the white disc on f6, while the black disc on e4 is sandwiched
between f4 and d4. In Diagram 1-9, White plays to c5, sandwiching the black discs
on d5 and e5 using the existing white disc on f5.
Diagram 1-4
White to move
Diagram 1-8
White to move
Diagram 1-7
Black to move
Diagram 1-6
White to move
Diagram 1-5
Black to move
Diagram 1-9
Black to move
Rules and notation
Suppose that in the position shown in Diagram 1-10, Black moves to f8. Diagram 1-11 shows the correct position after this move. The white disc on e6 is completely surrounded by black discs, but Black does not get to flip this disc, as it was not
sandwiched by the move to f8. Diagram 1-12 shows a position in which White does
not have a legal move. White passes, and Black moves again.
Diagram 1-10
Black to move
Diagram 1-11
White to move
Diagram 1-12
White passes
Playing through a transcript.
Diagram 1-13 shows an example of a transcript of a complete game. The numbers indicate the order in which the moves were made, but not which pieces were
flipped. To replay the game, place a black disc on the square marked 1 (f5 in this
case), and flip pieces according to the normal rules of the game (e5 should be flipped
to black in this case). Continue by playing a move for White on the square marked 2,
a move for Black on the square marked 3, etc. Diagram 1-14 shows the position
created after move 30, while Diagram 1-15 shows the final position. Partial transcripts are sometimes used to indicate a sequence of moves (see Diagram 2-9 for an
example).
38 39
31 42
27 22
53 17
25 24
Diagram 1-13
Transcript
Diagram 1-14
After move 30
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 1-15
Final position
Chapter 2
Corners and stable discs
Perhaps the most basic strategy in Othello is to take the corners. By the rules of
play, it is impossible to flip a disc in a corner, so that if you are able to take a corner,
that disc will be yours for the rest of the game. In Diagram 2-1, the disc on h8 must be
white at the end of the game: even if Black later moves to both g8 and h7, he can not
capture the disc on h8. Moreover, once you have a corner, it is often possible to build
a large number of discs that are protected by the corner and can never be flipped.
Such discs are called stable discs.
Diagram 2-1
Diagram 2-2
Diagram 2-3
In Diagram 2-2, the discs on the bottom row are stable discs, and in Diagram 23, all 21 white discs are stable discs. If this is not obvious to you, then take some time
now to convince yourself. Set up the positions on a board, then try to flip the stable
discs by placing black discs wherever you like. There is simply no way for Black to
get “behind” these discs to surround and flip them. The possibility of building up
stable discs usually makes corners very valuable, especially early in the game.
If taking corners is that good, then it should be obvious that you usually do not
want to give any to your opponent! Given the rules of the game, the only way for your
opponent to take a corner is if you play in one of the squares next to a corner, i.e., the
C-squares or X-squares. The X-squares are particularly dangerous, and a move to an
X-square early in the game is almost certain to give up the adjacent corner. For example, in Diagram 2-4, White has just moved to the X-square at g7. Although Black
can not take the h8 corner immediately, if he can establish even one disc on the c3-f6
diagonal, then Black will be able take the corner.
Corners and Stable Discs
Diagram 2-4
Black to move
Diagram 2-5
White to move
One possibility is for Black to play b5, capturing the disc on e5, as shown in
Diagram 2-5. No matter where White plays, he will not be able to recapture the e5
disc, and Black will be able to take the h8 corner on his next turn. Once black has the
corner, all of his discs on row 8 become stable discs, and later in the game he is likely
to be able to create stable discs on the right edge as well. In general, the earlier in the
game a corner is taken the more valuable it is, as the potential for building up stable
discs around the corner is greater. In most cases, moving to an X-square early in the
game will prove to be a fatal error, although later in the book we will examine some
exceptional circumstances under which early X-square moves are useful.
While moves to the X-square will usually allow the opponent to take the adjacent corner, for C-squares the degree of danger depends largely on the rest of the
squares on the same edge. For example, in Diagrams 2-6, 2-7, and 2-8, Black will
quickly lose the h1 corner. In Diagram 2-6, White simply takes the corner on the next
move. In Diagram 2-7, White can play h3; Black has no way of capturing the h3 disc,
and White will be able to play h1 on his next turn. Can you see the way that White can
capture the h1 corner in Diagram 2-8?
Diagram 2-6
White to move
Diagram 2-7
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 2-8
White to move
Starting from Diagram 2-8, White should play h3, gaining access to the h1 corner. Even if Black captures the h3 disc by playing h4, as in Diagram 2-9, White still
has access to the corner, as shown in Diagram 2-10. As these diagrams suggest, Csquares are often the most dangerous when the adjacent A-square is empty, allowing
the opponent to attack the corner by playing into the A-square. We will see many
more examples like this in later chapters.
Diagram 2-9
Diagram 2-10
White to move
While there are many circumstances under which C-squares are bad moves, they
are quite often perfectly good moves, and frequently they involve no danger of giving
up a corner despite being adjacent to it. Diagrams 2-11, 2-12, and 2-13 all show
examples where Black has a good C-square move at h2. In Diagram 2-11, h2 builds
on Black’s stable discs, and offers no prospect of white taking the h1 corner. In Diagram 2-12, Black must play h2 to prevent White from capturing the h8 corner. Once
he does so, he is in no immediate danger of losing a corner. In Diagram 2-13, black
can play h2 and later play another C-square at h7, all with no danger of losing a
corner. As these diagrams suggest, the best time to take a C-square is often when you
have pieces of your own color in the other squares along the edge.
Diagram 2-11
Black to move
Diagram 2-12
Black to move
Diagram 2-13
Black to move
Corners and Stable Discs
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 143.

Exercise 2-1
White to move
Exercise 2-2
Black to move
Exercise 2-5
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 2-3
White to move
Exercise 2-4
Black to move
Exercise 2-6
White to move
Chapter 3
Frontier discs and walls
In chapter 2, we learned about the value of corners, and the danger of moving to
X-squares and C-squares. While knowing this alone might be enough to let you win
against a complete novice, it will not get you far against more seasoned competition.
In games between players that are both aware of the strategies presented in chapter 2,
neither player will voluntarily make the sort of bad X-square and C-squares moves
that give up corners for no reason. If you want your opponent to make these moves,
then you will have to force him to do so. That is, you want to create a situation where
the only moves available to your opponent are bad moves. How to go about doing this
is the subject of this chapter, and indeed most of the rest of the book.
Diagram 3-1
White to move
Diagram 3-2
Black to move
Diagram 3-3
White to move
Diagram 3-1 shows the sort of position that often arises in games between an
expert (Black) and a novice (White). Many novices choose their moves mainly on the
basis of the number of discs that are flipped, with the more discs flipped the better.
After all, the object of the game is to end up with as many pieces as possible, so it
seems logical to want to take a lot of pieces at every point during the game. Following
this logic, the novice chooses to play a3, flipping 7 discs, as shown in Diagram 3-2.
The problem with this move becomes apparent after Black replies with a2, resulting
in the position shown in Diagram 3-3.

Frontier discs and walls
Diagram 3-4
Black to move
Diagram 3-5
White to move
Diagram 3-6
In Diagram 3-3, White’s only legal option is the b2 X-square, which White is
obliged to play whether he wants to or not (Diagram 3-4). This immediately surrenders the a1 corner (Diagram 3-5), and Black will eventually gain many stable discs
attached to this corner. Further, it will not be difficult for Black to force White to play
into another X-square in the near future. For example, suppose the game continues
with the sequence in Diagram 3-6, resulting in the position shown in Diagram 3-7.
Black can now play a7 (Diagram 3-8), which again leaves White with only one legal
move, namely the b7 X-square (Diagram 3-9).
In situations such as Diagram 3-3 and Diagram 3-8, we say that White has run
out of moves. More precisely, White has run out of safe moves (moves which do not
concede a corner), and now must give Black the corners and many stable discs. As
this example demonstrates, flipping too many discs early in the game can often lead
to running out of moves. Once a player runs out of moves he is almost certain to lose,
because his opponent can force him to make bad moves which give up the corners.
Diagram 3-7
Black to move
Diagram 3-8
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 3-9
Black to move
Diagram 3-10
White to move
Diagram 3-11
Black to move
Diagram 3-12
White to move
This point is so crucial to understanding the rest of the material in the book that
I present another example just to make sure that it is perfectly clear. Starting with
Diagram 3-10, White flips as many pieces as possible with g3 (Diagram 3-11), after
which Black responds with f7 (Diagram 3-12). Here again, White has run out of
moves; both of his remaining legal options, c8 and g7, surrender a corner, and Black
can eventually force White to give up the other corners (see Exercise 3-7).
To clarify further, I need to introduce some Othello jargon at this point. Frontier
discs are defined as discs that border one or more empty squares. Although technically discs on the edge squares could fit this definition, they are usually not included
when speaking of frontier discs. A wall is a connected group of frontier discs of the
same color. For example, in Diagram 3-10, the black discs at b3, c3, d3, e3, f3, f4, g4,
and g5 are all frontier discs and together they form a wall. Discs which are completely surrounded by other discs, such as e5 in Diagram 3-11, are called interior
discs or internal discs. A move which creates many new frontier discs is called a
loud move, while a quiet move creates relatively few frontier discs.
The real problem with White’s move in Diagram 3-11 is not that it flips so many
pieces, but that it flips the wrong pieces. Of the nine discs flipped, seven (b3, c3, d3,
e3, f3, g4, and g5) are frontier discs. This is an extreme example of a loud move,
flipping Black’s entire wall. In Diagram 3-10, White can choose between nine legal
moves (b2, c2, d2, e2, f2, g2, g3, h4 and h5), while in Diagram 3-12, White has only
two options, c8 and g7. By contrast, Black’s options increase from seven in Diagram
3-10 to seventeen in Diagram 3-11.
Remember that you must flip at least one of your opponent’s pieces in order to
move. Building a long wall leaves you with nothing to flip, cutting off your access to
the squares on the other side of the wall. Meanwhile, the same wall gives your opponent a wide range of choices. Building walls and running out of moves usually go
hand-in-hand.
Frontier discs and walls
Another example should provide further insight into basic Othello strategy. Diagram 3-13 shows an opening commonly used in expert play, leading to the position in
Diagram 3-14. Starting from this position, I used the Othello playing program WZebra (more information on this program appears in the Appendix) to evaluate the position. According to WZebra, set to look 20 moves ahead, White’s best move is e2, and
the position is worth +1.73 for white. In other words, WZebra’s estimate is that if
both sides play correctly from this point, White will win by roughly 2 discs (33-31).
14 16
13 12
Diagram 3-13
Diagram 3-14
White to move
Diagram 3-15
White +1.73
Next, I used the same position as in Diagram 3-15, but set WZebra so that it was
White’s turn to move instead of Black’s. You might expect that White will now enjoy
a bigger advantage, but WZebra values the position as -8.84 for White (Diagram 316). Making it White’s turn to move has made the position much worse for White! If
we continue to have White play several turns in a row, while Black does nothing,
every White move creates more and more white frontier discs, building walls and
eliminating his options. Eventually the position in Diagram 3-18 is reached. White
has completely run out of moves, and is at a huge disadvantage. Getting to make extra
moves would be great in most games, but not in Othello.
Diagram 3-17
White -10.05
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 3-16
White -8.84
Diagram 3-18
White -34.63
The idea that giving up your turn could be a good thing is so alien that many
people never discover it, even after playing Othello for years. Of course, the rules of
the game do not allow you to pass your turn whenever you want, and there are some
circumstances under which you certainly would not want to pass, such as near the end
of the game when you are trying to build as many stable discs as possible. However,
it does stand to reason that in situations where passing would be ideal, we should be
looking for moves which are as much like passing as possible.
In general, this means that quiet moves, which avoid creating a lot of frontier
discs, are better than loud moves. For example, in Diagram 3-19, c5 would be an ideal
move. It creates no new frontier discs, and no new options for White. The result is
very similar to Black passing, and now White must use up his last remaining safe
move (flipping the black disc on g3). In Diagram 3-20, White can make a quiet move
to g3. This move gives Black only one new option, namely h2. Since h2 would be a
terrible move for Black, again the effect is nearly the same as White passing, and
Black will have to use up one of his other remaining options. In Diagram 3-21, Black’s
best move is e6. Although this is certainly a quiet move, it is not quite as good as the
previous two examples, as it opens up some new safe options for White at d7 and f7.
Diagram 3-19
Black to move
Diagram 3-20
White to move
Diagram 3-21
Black to move
One of the problems with making loud moves is that it often leads to positions
where you have no quiet moves available, while at the same time your opponent can
make quiet moves. The result is that one loud move leads to a spiral of more and more
loud moves, which gives your opponent more are more quiet moves, until you are
eventually forced to start giving up corners. A bit more jargon will help to clarify this
point. A poison disc is a disc which turns what would otherwise be a quiet move into
a loud move. The potentially quiet move which is ruined by the poison disc is said to
be a poisoned move.

Frontier discs and walls
Diagram 3-22
White to move
Diagram 3-23
Black to move
Diagram 3-24
White to move
For example, in Diagram 3-19 Black has a wonderfully quiet move at c5. However, suppose that Black instead plays d7, as shown in Diagram 3-22. This move may
not seem that loud, because it is flipping discs in the middle of the board, but if you
look at the result carefully, you will see that it creates five new frontier discs (d2, d4,
d5, d6, and d7). White gratefully plays c5 himself (Diagram 3-23), a quiet move made
available by Black’s loud move, and now it is Black’s turn to move again. Note how
the extra black discs at d6 and d7 are poison discs, ruining many of Black’s potentially quiet moves. If Black plays g4 (Diagram 3-24), it flips f5 and e6 because of the
black disc on d7. This sets up another quiet move for White at g5. If Black tries a6 or
g6 in Diagram 3-23, the black disc on d6 means that Black would have to flip some of
White’s frontier discs on row 6. Black does have one quiet move left in Diagram 323, namely c7, but the loud move to d7 has turned a complete rout into a close game.
If the ideas in this chapter were new to you, then I welcome you to the relatively
small percentage of players who understand the main “secret” of Othello strategy.
Armed with this information you should soon see a dramatic improvement in your
play! However, as was the case with the basic strategies mentioned in Chapter 2, once
you start meeting opponents who are also aware of the “secret”, then you will have to
dig a bit deeper in order to win. The next four chapters, on openings, edge play,
endgames, and defense, cover the rest of what I consider to be the fundamentals of
Othello strategy.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 143.
Exercise 3-1
Black to move
Exercise 3-2
Black to move
Exercise 3-3
Black to move
Exercise 3-4
White to move
Exercise 3-5
White to move
Exercise 3-6
Black to move
Exercise 3-7
Set up the position in Diagram 3-12 on a board. Play out the rest of the game for
both sides, starting with a White move to g7. Try to find a simple sequence of moves
for Black that forces White to concede all 4 corners. Do the same starting with the
position in Diagram 3-7.
Exercise 3-8
Starting from Diagram 3-18, play out the rest of the game for both sides. Try to
convince yourself that even though Black has only one piece, White’s walls and lack
of options give Black the advantage. Hint: do not start with d2! If you find that White
wins the game, come back to this exercise after you finish reading the rest of Part I.
Frontier discs and walls
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 4
Introduction to openings
This chapter provides a brief introduction to the wonderful world of openings. I
want to draw a clear distinction between the opening phase of the game, which is
what I will discuss in this chapter, and book openings, i.e., moves that are prepared
and memorized before the game begins (see chapter 11). There is really no standard
definition of where the opening ends and the midgame begins. Often it is defined as
the first 10, 15, or at most 20 moves of the game. However, I prefer to think of the
opening as being over as soon as any of the edge squares are taken.
The introduction of strong computer programs in the 1990’s has had a dramatic
effect on opening theory. For experts, looking to grab an advantage wherever they
can, this has usually meant devoting a greater percentage of their practice time to
researching and memorizing book openings. There have even been cases of people
playing the entire game using memorized moves!
However, for novices, all of this opening theory leads to the opposite conclusion, suggesting that they should spend little or no time memorizing. It turns out that,
contrary to the beliefs of 10 or 20 years ago, there are many different ways to play the
opening, all of which lead to reasonably balanced positions. Even a lot of the moves
which look terrible turn out to give only a slight advantage to the opponent, certainly
not enough to worry about in a game between novices. For novice players, I feel that
there is little to be gained by memorizing openings. It would be far more useful, and
presumably a lot more enjoyable, to spend time playing games instead.
One other result from computer analysis is worth mentioning here. At the time
of this writing, it appears that a perfectly played game of Othello would end in a draw.
Thus, you need not worry too much about which color you play in any particular
game; neither side starts with an advantage. I would recommend that you play roughly
half of your games with each color. Having a “favorite” color that you insist on playing all the time is a bad habit to get into.
Let us begin our discussion of openings from the first move of the game. Black
has four options to choose from, but from a theoretical point of view they are all the
same, because the board is symmetric. From a practical point of view, however, it
does make some difference where you play. Most experts always play the first move
in the same place, and I would recommend that you do this as well, because positions
that you have seen before are easier to recognize that way. Personally, I have always
played move one at f5, and most of the diagrams in this book reflect this.
Introduction to openings
At move two, White has three choices, which are named perpendicular, diagonal, and parallel, reflecting the direction flipped relative to move one. These are pictured in Diagrams 4-1, 4-2, and 4-3 respectively. While both the perpendicular and
diagonal are commonly seen in expert play, the parallel is considered to be inferior.
The only time I can remember using the parallel was in a game played against Jonathan
Cerf, the 1980 World Champion, with black and white cupcakes instead of regular
pieces! I got into so much trouble that in desperation, I started to eat the pieces! While
it certainly would not hurt to practice playing the parallel, in games where you really
want to win, the perpendicular or diagonal would be a better choice.
Diagram 4-2
Diagonal
Diagram 4-1
Perpendicular
Diagram 4-3
Parallel
Suppose that you are Black and your opponent has chosen the perpendicular. At
move three you have five choices: c3, c4, c5, c6 and c7. How is Black to choose
among them? While some experts might disagree with me on this point, I believe that
the strategy for the early part of the game really is not all that different than the
midgame. Chapter 3 stressed the benefits of quiet moves and the drawbacks of loud
moves, and we will normally look for quiet moves in the opening phase of the game
as well. In this case, the definition for quiet moves I gave in Chapter 3 is not all that
useful, since all 5 of Black’s choices flip exactly one disc, and both the disc played
and the disc flipped will be frontier discs. Perhaps we could refine that definition and
say that the quietest move would be c5, since the piece flipped (d5) is surrounded in
five directions, and the c5 disc itself would be adjacent to three occupied squares.
The loudest move is c7, jutting out away from the other pieces. Indeed, when I first
started playing Othello in 1980, c5 was by far the most common choice for Black. It
just seemed natural to cut the three white discs in the middle. Meanwhile, c7 was, and
still is, the least popular choice. For the diagonal and parallel as well, the obvious
choice is to play quietly in the middle, i.e., e6 in Diagram 4-2 and e3 in Diagram 4-3.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Other than loudness, what other criteria could we use to choose a move? Perhaps the biggest difference between the opening and the rest of the game is that with
fewer pieces on the board, and no edge squares occupied, it becomes more important
to maintain discs in the center. If one player is able to cluster his discs in the middle,
that player is said to control the center, and many of the openings played in expert
games involve battles over the center. In the opening, it is often worth making a
louder move in order to capture central discs and set up quiet moves in the future.
For example, Diagram 4-4 shows one of the most common openings used in
expert play, leading to the position in Diagram 4-5. Here it might appear that a quiet
move much such as d1 is in order, but this does nothing to combat Black’s control of
the center. In fact, White often plows through the middle as shown in Diagram 4-6,
establishing a presence in the center.
Diagram 4-4
Diagram 4-5
White to move
Diagram 4-6
Compare Diagrams 4-7 and 4-8. The positions are identical except for the color
of the disc on f5. Think for a moment about which of these two positions is more
favorable for Black.
Diagram 4-7
Black to move
Diagram 4-8
Black to move
Diagram 4-9
White to move
Introduction to openings
From what we have discussed so far, it might seem that the position in Diagram
4-8 should be more favorable for Black. After all, in this position White has an extra
frontier disc, and frontier discs are usually bad. However, in Diagram 4-7, the f5 disc
is very valuable for Black, since it allows him to move to f3, leaving Black with a
very compact position (see Diagram 4-9), and forcing White to play to the outside on
his next turn. Black has a considerable advantage.
In Diagram 4-8, White has a lot of frontier discs,
but Black has a bit of an awkward position. There are
many reasonably quiet moves, but none of them really
establishes a presence in the center. The obvious move
is probably for Black to just come through the middle
as shown in Diagram 4-10, but this would leave White
with quiet moves at d3, f3, d7 and f7. Despite the large
number of white frontier discs, the position in Diagram
4-8 is considered to be even.
Diagram 4-10
Diagrams 4-11, 4-12, and 4-13 show some common opening errors to avoid. In
Diagram 4-11, White’s move jutting out away from the center is bad. It is far better to
play f4, taking two discs in the middle. Diagram 4-12 shows another bad choice for
White. This move needlessly allows Black to grab an excellent spot at e6. In Diagram
4-13, White plays toward the outside at f6. It is better is to play f4, which looks
similar, but is more toward the center.
While openings can seem difficult, if you play in the center and keep your moves
quiet, you will usually have a reasonable position going into the midgame. The game
becomes a lot more difficult when play reaches the edges, which is the subject of
Chapter 5.
Diagram 4-11
Black to move
Diagram 4-12
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 4-13
Black to move
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. These exercises are considerably more
difficult than those in previous chapters. Answers begin on page 145.

Exercise 4-1
Black to move
Exercise 4-2
White to move
Exercise 4-3
White to move
Exercise 4-4
White to move
Exercise 4-5
Black to move
Exercise 4-6
White to move
Introduction to openings
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 5
Basic edge play
At the start of the game there are 60 empty squares on the board, and 28 of those
squares are on the edges. Thus edge moves account for almost half of all the moves in
a typical game, and I believe that the winner of most games is decided by how well
both sides play the edges. As I discussed in Chapter 4, in the opening there are often
many different moves to choose from, all of which result in a reasonably balanced
position. On the edges, the opposite is true. Usually there is one move that is clearly
better than the rest, and a mistake can give your opponent a huge advantage.
As we have already seen, quiet moves are usually better than loud moves, and
this holds true for edge moves as well. If your opponent has run out of moves, then a
quiet edge move is often enough to decide the game. We have already seen one example of this in Diagram 3-3. In Diagram 5-1 Black has run out of safe moves, but it
is White’s turn. If White could pass, then Black would be forced to move to an Xsquare and concede a corner. Of course White can not pass, but he can play g1, which
has basically the same effect as a pass. As shown in Diagram 5-2, Black still has no
safe moves and must play to an X-square. Moves such as g1 in this example are
called free moves: Black can not prevent White from taking g1 whenever he wants,
and g1 offers no new safe options for Black. While it is possible to have a free move
in the middle of the board, most free moves occur on the edge. Sometimes there will
be an opportunity for more than one free move along the same edge. In Diagram 5-3,
White has three free moves along the eastern edge at h4, h3, and h2 (note that they
must be taken in that order), and can easily run Black out of moves.
Diagram 5-2
Black to move
Diagram 5-1
White to move
Diagram 5-3
White to move
Basic edge play
Diagram 5-4
White to move
Diagram 5-5
White to move
Diagram 5-6
White to move
Given the power of free moves, it is usually a bad idea to make a move which
offers one to your opponent. Diagrams 5-4, 5-5, and 5-6 show three bad moves by
Black which generate a free move for White. In all three cases, White will take the
eastern edge on his next turn and be left with a free move to h2.
The concept of tempo
In Diagrams 5-1 and 5-2, White uses a free move to achieve the same effect as a
pass. In Diagram 5-1 it is White’s turn to move, but in Diagram 5-2, it is Black’s turn.
White has transferred the burden of initiating play to Black without offering Black
any new safe options. In English, White is said to gain a tempo. In Japanese, White
is said to “hand over the move (to the opponent)”.
Diagram 5-7 shows a position from a game in the 1992 All Japan Championship. Playing White is Hideshi Tamenori, a 5-time World Champion and generally
regarded as the greatest player of all time. His opponent was Ken’ichi Ishii, himself a
2-time World Champion.
Diagram 5-7
White to move
Diagram 5-8
Othello: A minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 5-9
Black to move
In this position, Tamenori played a5!! This might appear to be a terrible blunder,
but it was actually the best move. As shown in Diagram 5-8, Ishii replied by taking
the a1 corner, stabilizing both the left and top edges, after which Tamenori filled in
the hole at b2. The resulting position is shown in Diagram 5-9. Note that, compared
with Diagram 5-7, Black has no new options, and in fact one of his safe options,
namely a5 itself, is no longer available. Further, it is now Black’s turn to move! Thus,
by playing the sequence in Diagram 5-8, Tamenori was able to gain a critical tempo.
He handed-over the burden of initiating play to Black, leaving Black in grave danger
of running completely out of moves. As demonstrated in this example, it is often
worth sacrificing a corner in order to gain a tempo.
In the opening, when play is in the center of the board, finding the best move
may not be easy, but usually even the second or third best move would not lose a
tempo. The reason that edge moves tend to be so critical in determining the winner of
the game is that a mistake on the edge will often lose a tempo. Especially in expert
play, one extra tempo is often the difference between winning and losing. Throughout the rest of this chapter, and indeed the rest of the book, we will see many examples of how tempos are won and lost.
Wings won’t make you fly
In Diagram 5-10, Black’s position on the left edge is called an unbalanced edge
or wing. While the term wing refers only to this edge pattern, unbalanced can also be
used to describe the top edge (unbalanced three) or the right edge (unbalanced four).
Unbalanced edges are inherently dangerous as the occupied C-square could offer the
opponent access to the adjacent corner. They are often vulnerable to a variety of
attacks, many of which can quickly determine the outcome of a game. The pattern on
the bottom edge, with all six squares between the corners filled, is called a balanced
edge and in many circumstances is the best possible edge position to have.
Diagram 5-10
Diagram 5-11
Black to move
Diagram 5-12
White to move
Basic edge play
Diagram 5-11 shows an example where Black can exploit White’s unbalanced
three on the bottom edge. Black should begin with d8, attacking the h8 corner, as
shown in Diagram 5-12. This leaves White with two unappealing choices: save the
corner by playing c8, flipping Black’s entire wall, or play somewhere else and allow
Black to take the corner. In either case, Black will have a huge advantage in the game.
Diagram 5-13
Diagram 5-14
Diagram 5-15
Black to move
White to move
In many circumstances, attacking an unbalanced edge is so powerful that it is
worth sacrificing a corner to do so. In Diagram 5-13, Black can initiate an attack on
White’s wing by playing g1! If White takes the h1 corner, then Black can wedge (play
between two discs of the opposite color) at h2, and then take the h8 corner, as shown
in Diagram 5-14. The resulting position is Diagram 5-15. The question is, which
corner is more valuable, h1 or h8? In this case, h8 is clearly more valuable. Having
the h1 corner gives White stable pieces on the top edge, but that is about the end of the
story. Meanwhile, Black will be able to extend out from his h8 corner, capturing most
if not all of the bottom edge. In essence, Black has sacrificed one edge (the top edge),
but will receive two edges (the right and bottom edges), and a tempo, in return.
Since unbalanced edges are often subject to ata
tack, you should look for opportunities to turn your
opponent’s edge into an unbalanced edge. In Diagram
5-16, Black should play f1, leaving the position in Dia4
gram 5-17. If White takes at g1, Black has a quiet move
at f2, gaining a tempo (Diagram 5-18) and leaving
White with an unbalanced edge to attack later. If White
does not take g1, then black can play b1, effectively
gaining two tempos. For example, in Diagram 5-19, it
is White’s turn to move (Black has gained a tempo)
Diagram 5-16
and Black’s free move at g1 is good for another tempo.
Black to move
Othello: A minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 5-17
White to move
Diagram 5-18
White to move
Diagram 5-19
White to move
Mind the gap
Suppose that in Diagram 5-20, Black decides to move somewhere on the right
edge, trying to gain a tempo. He could play h3, leaving a 2-square gap between his
pieces on the edge (Diagram 5-21), or to h4, leaving a 1-square gap. A general rule of
thumb is that it is better to leave a 2-square gap than a 1-square gap. In Diagram 5-21,
the squares h4 and h5 form a pair. If White plays into one of these squares, Black will
play into the other, after which White will have to initiate play somewhere else on the
board. Thus, regardless of whether White plays into the pair or not, Black’s initial
choice of h3 will force White to play to the west (or an X-square), which will open up
new choices for Black.
In this case the 2-square gap is between the A-squares, but 2-square gaps often
occur between a C-square and (its more distant) B-square or even between a corner
and a B-square. The concept of a pair is extremely useful, and we will see many more
examples of it throughout the rest of the book.
Diagram 5-20
Black to move
Diagram 5-21
White to move
Diagram 5-22
White to move
Basic edge play
Diagram 5-23
Black to move
Diagram 5-24
White to move
Diagram 5-25
Black to move
Compare this to the situation in Diagram 5-22 with a 1-square gap. Here, h3 and
h5 appear to form a pair. However, as shown in Diagram 5-23, if White plays h3, then
Black does not have access to h5! Now, Black will have to initiate play elsewhere. Of
course, there will be other times that Black could fill the hole at h5. Suppose that,
starting from Diagram 5-23, we make the disc at f3 black, and allow Black to play h5.
This is shown in Diagram 5-24. One possibility for White is to take the edge with h7
(Diagram 5-25), and again Black will be forced to initiate play elsewhere. In other
words, going back to Diagram 5-20, playing to create the 2-square gap with h3 gains
a tempo, while creating a 1-square gap with h4 does not. There are many other cases
where the opponent can exploit a 1-square gap by playing into the gap (Diagram 2-7
is one obvious example). While there are certainly occasions where leaving a 1square gap is a good move, it is usually better to leave a 2-square gap or no gap at all.
That said, it should be noted that having a 2-square gap is still a liability! Another rule
of thumb is that such gaps should be left untouched unless there is some reason for
filling them in (this point is discussed further in Chapter 6).
Diagram 5-26
Black to move
The most common circumstance under which it
is advantageous to leave a 1-square gap is shown in
Diagram 5-26. Here, both sides have taken an A-square
on the south edge. White is threatening to gain a tempo
by playing e8, and Black must find some means of
dealing with this threat. Since e8 is too loud for Black,
the best move is d8, leaving a 1-square gap at e8. If
White continues with e8, Black can take the edge with
b8, leaving a free move at g8.

Othello: A minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Anchors won’t weigh you down
If you follow the basic strategy of this book and make mostly quiet moves, while
your opponent is grabbing as many discs as possible, then you may occasionally find
yourself in a position where you are in danger of losing by wipeout. In Diagram 5-27,
White has a lot of walls and very few places to move, which would normally make
this an easy win for Black. However, with only one piece left, Black’s options are
also limited. If Black plays the “safe” move c2, then white completes the wipeout
with c1. Black’s only other choice is g2, which will give up the h1 corner.
Diagram 5-28
Black to move
Diagram 5-27
Black to move
Diagram 5-29
Often the best way to avoid this situation is to take at least one piece on an edge,
preferably an A-square, that you can use as your “anchor”. Even if taking the edge
does not look theoretically correct, perhaps because you have a quieter move elsewhere, establishing an anchor can save you from all kinds of grief later in the game.
For example, suppose you are Black in Diagram 5-28. Your opponent has been grabbing pieces from the start of the game, and you already have a big advantage. However, your opponent is also one move away from wiping you out: if you get careless
and play e2, your opponent grabs e1 and the game is
over.
In this sort of situation, making an anchoring move
at h3 will make it extremely hard for your opponent to
score a wipeout. Suppose that the game continues as
shown in Diagram 5-29, leaving the position in Dia5
gram 5-30. Now the anchor disc gives Black access to
d7, slicing through the middle and leaving Black with
an overwhelming advantage.
Diagram 5-30
Black to move
Basic edge play
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 145.

Exercise 5-1
Black to move
Exercise 5-2
Black to move
Exercise 5-5
White to move
Exercise 5-3
White to move
Exercise 5-4
Black to move
Exercise 5-6
White to move
Exercise 5-7
Starting from Diagram 5-27, play out the rest of the game for both sides, starting
with a Black move to g2. Even after losing the h1 corner, Black should be able to win.

Othello: A minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 6
Basic endgame strategy
If you are fortunate enough to build up a big lead in the opening and midgame,
then the endgame can sometimes be a relatively easy mopping-up operation. However, when neither side carries this sort of advantage, the endgame can be extremely
difficult. Even at the highest (human) levels of play, many games are won or lost in
the last few moves. Unlike most strategy games, in Othello the board becomes more
crowded as the game goes on, which results in more discs being flipped on each turn.
Rapidly changing fortunes in the endgame is one of the things that makes Othello
great! In this chapter we will examine some of the basic endgame strategies, saving
the more difficult material for chapters 8 and 13.
1 13
2 14
3 15
7 16
Diagram 6-1
Black to move
Diagram 6-2
Diagram 6-3
Black 53, white 10
In Diagram 6-1, Black has run White out of moves and has complete control of
the game. Winning from here is hardly rocket science. Black can simply force White
to give up the corners, and sweep around the edges. Diagram 6-2 shows one possible
sequence of moves, resulting in the final position shown in Diagram 6-3. Notice that
throughout this sequence, White has very few choices, and Black just keeps on accumulating more and more stable discs. In general, once your opponent is out of safe
moves, you should try to keep him out of moves for the rest of the game. I have seen
many examples where people let their opponent back in the game by getting too
fancy in the endgame, trying to squeeze out every last disc instead of winning in the
simplest way possible. With the board changing rapidly it is easy to overlook something and make a silly mistake. Always remember that in the endgame, simple is best.

Basic endgame strategy
Diagram 6-4
Black to move
Diagram 6-5
Diagram 6-6
Diagram 6-4 shows another example where Black has run White out of moves.
Here again, Black should be looking for the simplest way to win the game. While in
this case grabbing the corners is sufficient to win, it is not that easy to build from the
corner. For example, in Diagram 6-5, if Black takes a8, then White plays away diagonally at b5, and Black can not extend away from a8. The easiest way to win is shown
in Diagram 6-6. Black begins with a7, intentionally giving up the a8 corner, and
continues with a6, allowing White to take four discs on the edge. Black can then
repeat the same moves near the a1 corner, as shown in Diagram 6-7. After filling in
the last four squares (Diagram 6-8) the final position is reached in Diagram 6-9. Notice how White has taken the left edge, but little else. Black has captured many discs
in the middle of the board, and hence this technique is called an interior sweep. It is
also worth noting that throughout the entire sequence, every White move was forced.
Diagram 6-7
Black to move
Diagram 6-8
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 6-9
Black wins 42-22
Diagram 6-10
Black to move
Diagram 6-11
Black’s a7 fails
Diagram 6-12
Black’s a2 wins
While there are many occasions when taking the corner is better than using an
interior sweep, it is usually much easier to finish the game using an interior sweep. It
is often possible to leave your opponent with no choices for the rest of the game as
you build up more and more stable interior discs.
Diagram 6-10 shows another example which is similar to Diagram 6-4, except
that black has a much smaller lead as the bottom edge is white. Black will again want
to execute an interior sweep, but note that this time Black must start with a2 rather
than a7. If he starts with a7, as shown in Diagram 6-11, then White ends up doing
most of the sweeping, and Black will lose. Much better for Black is to start with a2
(Diagram 6-12), near the edge which he owns. Now Black can properly execute an
interior sweep, capturing most of row 7 on his last move, when it is too late for White
to recapture those discs.
Interior sweeps can also be used on two different edges. In Diagram 6-13, Black
can certainly play a move such as e1 and use the disc on e4 to take the corners, but it
is much easier to win with an interior sweep, as shown in Diagram 6-14.
11 12
Diagram 6-13
Black to move
Diagram 6-14
Diagram 6-15
Final position
Basic endgame strategy
Diagonal control
The preceding examples were relatively easy, since one side had already run out
of moves. One common way to create this sort of situation is to use diagonal control,
i.e., to capture all of the discs on one of the diagonal lines on the board. While this
term could be used to talk about any diagonal line, in the endgame it usually refers to
the long diagonals that run from a1 to h8 or a8 to h1, as shown in Diagram 6-16.
Usually these are called the main diagonals, although in Japan they are often referred to as the whiteline and blackline (owing to the color of the discs in the starting
position), respectively.
Diagonal control often allows you to move to an X-square, or sometimes both
X-squares on the same diagonal, without offering your opponent a corner. These moves
usually gain a tempo, and are often enough to run your opponent out of moves. Diagram 6-17 shows an example to illustrate the basic idea. White should play to g7,
controlling the main diagonal, as shown in diagram 6-18. Black has no choice but to
play g8, allowing White to sweep around the edges and win easily.
Diagram 6-16
Main diagonals
Diagram 6-17
White to move
Diagram 6-18
Black to move
Positions similar to the one in Diagram 6-17 occur with great frequency in games
where both players are using the basic strategy of avoiding X-squares. In such games,
almost the entire board becomes filled in, with the X-squares and corners empty. If
one player can control a diagonal, as in Diagram 6-18, the result is usually a lopsided
victory for that player. Sometimes each player is able to grab one of the main diagonals, in which case the outcome of the game hinges on which side will run out of
moves first. Having access to both X-squares on the diagonal is often critical in these
situations.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 6-19
White to move
Diagram 6-20
Diagram 6-21
Black to move
For example, Diagram 6-19 is identical to Diagram 6-17, except that the disc on
f3 has been made white. If White controls the whiteline with g7, then Black can grab
the blackline with g2, as shown in Diagram 6-20. In this case White can continue
with b2, running Black out of moves and winning the game (Diagram 6-21). If White
did not have access to b2 (for example if we make the disc at b4 black), then it would
be White who runs out of moves first and Black would win the game. Thus, even
though you might not want to play to an X-square early in the game, it is often important to have access to the X-squares late in the game. The pattern near the a8 corner in
Diagram 6-19, where Black has no hope of accessing b7, is a major liability for Black.
Experts are usually reluctant to create this sort of pattern, as it may come back to
haunt them later in the game.
Breaking the diagonal
While in the examples above control of the diagonal was permanent, in many
cases control of the diagonal is only temporary. In fact, if we are successful at running
our opponent out of moves, forcing him to move to an X-square, we certainly hope to
use that X-square to take the adjacent corner. If the X-square move happens to control
the diagonal, then in order to take the corner, we must break the diagonal. That is,
we must establish a disc on the diagonal controlled by the opponent. We have already
seen one example of this in Diagrams 2-4 and 2-5.
Of course, the player who controls the diagonal will usually be anxious to keep
his opponent off of it. Often, a move which breaks the diagonal will be followed by
another move which flips the piece (or pieces) on the diagonal back again. Battles
over diagonal control can sometimes continue for several turns, and even for experts
it is often difficult to determine whether a diagonal can eventually be broken.

Basic endgame strategy
Diagram 6-22
White to move
Diagram 6-23
Black to move
Diagram 6-24
White to move
Diagram 6-22 shows a game in which Black ran out of moves, and in desperation played to g7, taking control of the diagonal. If White can break the diagonal, then
he can take the h8 corner and sweep around the edges, winning by a huge margin.
However, in this case breaking the diagonal permanently is not easy. White has four
moves which break the diagonal, i.e., b3, b4, b5, and b6, but in each case Black has a
reply which reestablishes control (a3, a4, a5, and a7, respectively). For example, if
White tries b4 (Diagram 6-23), Black will reply a4 (Diagram 6-24). Now the only
move which breaks the diagonal is b3 (Diagram 6-25), but Black again takes control
with a3 (Diagram 6-26). Suddenly, Black is winning the game!
When you are trying to break a diagonal, it is often best to use a move which
flips diagonally. Starting from Diagram 6-22, White should play b6, flipping the piece
on d4, as shown in Diagram 6-27. Black has little choice but to play a7, keeping
control of the diagonal (Diagram 6-28). However, a7 is a C-square, and as shown in
Chapter 2, is subject to attack.
Diagram 6-25
Black to move
Diagram 6-26
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 6-27
Black to move
Diagram 6-28
White to move
Diagram 6-29
Diagram 6-30
One possibility for White is to play a6, attacking the a8 corner (Diagram 6-29).
Black must take the edge at a5. Now White can play b5, breaking the diagonal by
flipping the disc on e5, and since a5 is occupied, Black has no way to recapture e5.
Another possibility for White in Diagram 6-28 is to play b5, again breaking the diagonal at e5 (Diagram 6-30). Black can flip e5 back by playing a5, but now White can
wedge at a6, and will be able to take the a8 corner on his next turn, winning easily.
Back in Chapter 5, Diagram 5-21 showed an example where one side leaves a 2square gap on the edge. While this sort of move is often useful to gain a tempo, 2square gaps can be a major handicap in an endgame which comes down to diagonal
control. In Diagram 6-31, Black has just played g2, taking control of the diagonal and
creating a large block of stable discs. It might appear that black has the game won, but
White can break the diagonal by playing h5 (Diagram 6-32) and squeeze out a narrow
victory. If the h4-h5 pair were filled in (Diagram 6-33), White has no way to win.
Because of situations such as these, White should leave pairs such as h4-h5 empty
until there is a clear advantage to be gained by entering the pair.
Diagram 6-31
White to move
Diagram 6-32
Black to move
Diagram 6-33
White to move
Basic endgame strategy
Introduction to swindles
Chapter 5 introduced the concept of a pair. A swindle occurs when one player
gets both moves in a pair because, following the first move into the pair, the opponent
does not have a legal move to the other square in the pair. In Diagram 6-34, it might
seem obvious that Black should play to h8, grabbing the entire right edge. White will
end the game with g8 (Diagram 6-35), with White winning 33-31. However, notice
what happens if Black plays to g8 instead (Diagram 6-36). In this case, White gets
swindled; he does not have access to h8, and must pass! Black ends the game with h8,
winning 36-28 (Diagram 6-37).
Diagram 6-38 shows another example of a swindle. Suppose that Black plays
a1, as in Diagram 6-39. White would like to wedge at b1, gaining access to h1. However, in this case White can not play to b1 because he does not have a piece on the b
column. Black will later move to b1 himself, creating many stable discs. Also note
how this swindle gains valuable tempos for Black. Swindles are discussed in much
greater detail in Chapter 10.
Diagram 6-34
Black to move
Diagram 6-38
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 6-36
Black to move
Diagram 6-35
Black h8, white G8
Diagram 6-37
Diagram 6-39
White to move
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 146.

Exercise 6-1
Black to move
Exercise 6-2
White to move
Exercise 6-5
Black to move
Exercise 6-3
White to move
Exercise 6-4
White to move
Exercise 6-6
Black to move
Basic endgame strategy
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 7
Playing defense
The previous few chapters have concentrated on strategies for finding good
moves: taking corners, creating stable discs, making quiet moves, and so on. However, there is another, equally important part of the game— preventing your opponent
from making the same sort of good moves that you are aiming for yourself. In this
chapter we discuss defensive plays which attempt to take away good moves from the
opponent. If you play through the transcript of any game between experts, you are
likely to find at least a few defensive moves.
There are essentially three types of defensive moves. The first type is to flip
some of your opponent’s pieces to take away access to his good move. A simple
example is shown in Diagram 7-1. Here, White is threatening to take the a8 corner,
which is clearly a good move. However, if Black makes a defensive play at g8, flipping the white disc on f8, he can deny White access to the corner.
The second type of defensive move is to play where your opponent wants to
play. In Diagram 7-2, White would like to take the a8 corner. The only way to prevent
him from doing so is for Black to take the corner himself. In this case, taking the
corner is attractive for Black as well, but in other circumstances it pays to play in your
opponent’s spot, even if it is a relatively loud move.
The third type of defensive move is to somehow make the opponent’s good
move less attractive. In Diagram 7-3, White has a good move to f8. There is no way to
take away White’s access to f8, but Black can make the move much less attractive by
playing f7. Now if White plays f8, it would flip the entire f-column.
Diagram 7-1
Black to move
Diagram 7-2
Black to move
Diagram 7-3
Black to move
Playing defense
Diagram 7-4
Diagram 7-5
Diagram 7-6
White to move
Black to move
White to move
Diagram 7-4 shows an opening position that often leads to a series of moves
with White on defense and Black on offense. Note, however, that this does not mean
the opening is good for Black. At each turn, Black threatens to make a very quiet
move, but White can deal with these threats with defensive plays, and the opening is
actually favorable for White. In Diagram 7-4, Black has a quiet move to f6, so White
takes it away by playing d2 (Diagram 7-5), flipping the disc on d4. Note that an
alternative is for White to play f6 himself, but this flips two frontier discs and creates
a long wall, so d2 is the better move.
Black reestablishes access to f6 by playing g4 (Diagram 7-6), so White takes it
away again with b6 (Diagram 7-7). Here again there are alternatives. For example,
White could deny access by playing to c3 (Diagram 7-8), which is a bit loud but is not
unreasonable. White could play f6 himself, but this is really too loud and would leave
Black with a good move to g5. Another possibility in Diagram 7-6 is for White to
play g6 (Diagram 7-9), which makes Black’s move to f6 less attractive because it
flips the frontier disc on f5.
Diagram 7-8
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 7-7
Black to move
Diagram 7-9
Black to move
Diagram 7-10
White to move
Diagram 7-11
Black to move
Diagram 7-12
Black to move
Continuing on from Diagram 7-7, Black usually chooses b5, setting up a quiet
move to c3 (Diagram 7-10). Here again, White has two good ways to deal with this
threat. In Diagram 7-11, White takes away Black’s access to c3 by flipping the disc
on e5. In Diagram 7-12, White plays c3 himself.
As the above examples suggest, when you opponent is threatening to make a
very good move, the best move will usually be a defensive move. In a position such
as Diagram 7-10, Black’s move to c3 is so good that White absolutely must prevent
him from moving there. It might be tempting for White to make a quiet move of his
own, for example g5, but even making a loud move such as e7 (flipping the black disk
on e5) would be better than letting Black move to c3.
Diagram 7-3 showed an example where it is possible to make the opponent’s
best move much less attractive. While that example was rather dramatic, even rather
subtle defensive plays can be effective. For example, in Diagram 7-13, Black has a
good move at f6. White can deny access by playing d2 (Diagram 7-14), which is a
reasonable move, but most experts prefer to play g6 (Diagram 7-15). After g6, Black’s
Diagram 7-13
White to move
Diagram 7-14
Black to move
Diagram 7-15
Black to move
Playing defense
Diagram 7-16
White to move
Diagram 7-17
Black to move
Diagram 7-18
White to move
best move is still f6 (Diagram 7-16), but now White has a good move at g5 (Diagram
7-17). If White does not make some sort of defensive move in Diagram 7-13, then
Black can gain a significant advantage. For example, if White plays 14. f2, Black
responds with f6 (Diagram 7-18). Now it is too late for White to play g6, because it
flips the disc on f5. White will not get a move to g5 as he could in Diagram 7-16,
because Black will use the f5 disc to move there himself.
Diagram 7-19 shows an example where it is important to consider both offense
and defense. At first glance, c2 is the obvious choice for Black (Diagram 7-20). It is
a very quiet move, flipping only internal discs, and leaves White with no new options. However, considering defense as well as offense, Black has a much better
move, namely b5 (Diagram 7-21)! Although this move might seem too loud to be
good, it is an excellent defensive move, as it flips the white disc on g5. This eliminates two potentially good moves for White at c1 (gaining a tempo on the edge) and
g7 (attacking Black’s unbalanced edge). Moreover, Black is still threatening to make
quiet moves at c2 as well as c6.
Diagram 7-19
Black to move
Diagram 7-20
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 7-21
White to move
Exercises
In each diagram, find a good defensive move. Answers begin on page 147.

Exercise 7-1
White to move
Exercise 7-2
Black to move
Exercise 7-5
White to move
Exercise 7-3
White to move
Exercise 7-4
Black to move
Exercise 7-6
White to move
Playing defense
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 8
Even number theory
One of the most important strategies in Othello is what the Japanese call even
number theory; others refer to it as parity. Before examining this theory, we need to
define the term region. As the name implies, a region refers to an empty area of the
board, usually (although not always) including a corner, separate from other empty
squares. In Diagram 8-1, the board has been broken up into four separate regions: 3
squares in the upper left, 8 squares in the upper right, 3 squares in the lower right, and
7 squares in the lower left.
The basic idea behind parity is that, when there is a region with an even number
of squares left to be filled, it is usually better to play into the region last. That is, you
want your opponent to play into the region first, after which you follow, hopefully
flipping back some of the pieces that your opponent just captured. In Diagram 8-2, it
might appear obvious that Black would want to move first, taking the h1 corner and
saving the adjacent four black discs. White would then take the last move at g1,
leaving Black with 37 discs (Diagram 8-3).
Now suppose that it is White to move first in Diagram 8-2. White has no choice
but to play h1 (Diagram 8-4). Black takes the last move at g1 (Diagram 8-5). As
shown in Diagram 8-5, this leaves Black with 38 discs, one more than in Diagram 83! Perhaps you are wondering “what is the big deal about one disc”? The point is that
even when it looked like Black wanted to go first, in fact he was better off going
second. In many positions, such as Diagram 8-6, the difference between playing first
and playing second is the difference between winning and losing.
Diagram 8-1
White to move
Diagram 8-2
Diagram 8-3
Black H1, White G1
Even number theory
Diagram 8-4
White H1
Diagram 8-5
Black G1
Diagram 8-6
Diagram 8-7 shows an example of even number theory with four squares left.
Suppose that it is Black’s turn to move (Diagram 8-8). Black has no choice but to play
b2, after which White takes the a1 corner. Now there are two squares left; naturally
Black must play first, giving White a good final move and a 33-31 victory. On the
other hand, if it were White’s turn in Diagram 8-7, then after the sequence shown in
Diagram 8-9, Black wins 37-27. As these examples suggest, the impact of even number theory is often greater for a 4-square region than for a 2-square region.
While in the examples above we have only looked at the final moves, in an
actual game, once there are only two squares left, it is too late to start worrying about
whether you want to go first or second. After all, that is something you do not get to
choose! The real power behind even number theory is that earlier in the game, sometimes much earlier, it may be possible to play in such a way that you are guaranteed to
get the last move in most or all of the regions. Since there are very often several
regions on the board, the cumulative advantage of getting the last move in each of
them can add up to be worth many discs.
Diagram 8-7
Diagram 8-8
Black first
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 8-9
White first
In fact, it is often worth sacrificing one, two, or even all four corners if it ensures
that you can play last in every region. Diagram 8-10 shows a position from the 2001
World Championship finals. White appears to be in considerable trouble. He has already conceded the a8 corner, and what is worse, has no safe moves available. Since
it is White’s turn, this means that he will have to give up yet another corner. Despite
all this, even number theory actually gives White a slight advantage in the game! The
main feature to notice in this position is that all four regions of the board have an even
number of squares, except for the lower-right hand corner, which has three squares.
2 12 11
Diagram 8-10
White to move
Diagram 8-11
Black to move
Diagram 8-12
Perfect play
White should begin by playing into the odd-numbered region, i.e., either g7 or
g8. In this case, g7 is considerably better, since it allows White to keep the bottom
edge at the end of the game (if this is not clear to you, try playing g8 in Diagram 8-10,
then use the sequence in Diagram 8-12, except for playing move 4 at g7 instead of
g8). The resulting position is shown in Diagram 8-11. Note how all of the regions
now contain an even number of squares. Unfortunately for Black, he will (with one
exception) have to initiate play into even regions for the rest of the game. Meanwhile,
finding the right moves for White is easy: whenever Black plays into a region, simply
follow him by playing in the same region.
Diagram 8-12 shows perfect play for both sides (I strongly urge you to play this
sequence out on a board). Note how Black is always playing into an even-numbered
region, creating an odd-numbered region for White. White gets the last move in each
region except for the final two squares, when Black passes and forces White to initiate play. Still, the advantage of playing into an odd-numbered region on six of his
last seven moves allows White to eke out a 33-31 victory. In this case, we say that
White won by using even number theory, or that White had parity, that is, White got
the last move in every (or almost every) region.

Even number theory
Thus far we have looked at even-number theory only in the endgame, but it can
also help find the right move earlier in the game. Consider the starting position, before the first move is made. The board has 64 squares, and four squares are occupied,
so that there are 60 empty squares in this position. In some sense, all 60 empty squares
on the board can be viewed as one large even-numbered region. On the first move of
the game, Black moves into an even-numbered region, on the second move, White
moves into an odd-numbered region (59 empty), and so on. Thus, from the beginning
of the game, even-number theory is working in favor of White. If the game proceeds
without any passes, then White will get the last move of the game on move 60.
As noted earlier, in Diagram 8-6, whichever side plays first will lose. Even number theory tells us that if no passes occurred during the game, then it must now be
Black’s turn, because there are an even number of empty squares. The only way it
could be White’s turn would be if there was one pass (or some odd number of passes).
Similarly, in Diagram 8-11, it is not merely a coincidence that it is Black’s turn to
move.
While the above examples might make it appear that White starts the game with
a big advantage, there are ways for Black to make even number theory work in his
favor. For example, Diagram 8-13 shows a position from a game played at the 1982
World Championship. Black was played by Kunihito Tanida from Japan, who went
on to win the tournament. Up until this point there were no passes, and there are an
even number of empty squares, so it must be Black’s turn. Note, however, that instead
of even-numbered regions, there are two odd-numbered regions: three squares in the
upper left corner, and one square at e1. Further, note that White can not move to e1.
This allows Black to win by playing b1 (Diagram 8-14)! According to even number
theory, White should play into the odd region, i.e., e1, but in this case White does not
have access, and must play into the even region. White can play a1, but Black gets the
last move in the region by playing b2, leaving the position in Diagram 8-15.
Diagram 8-13
Black to move
Diagram 8-14
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 8-15
White passes
White still does not have access to e1 and must pass. Black finishes the game by
playing e1 himself, squeezing out a 33-31 victory (Diagram 8-16). Since Black got
the last move in each region, we say that Black used anti-even number theory, or that
Black had parity.
Diagram 8-16
Black wins
Diagram 8-17
Black to move
Diagram 8-18
White passes
Again, the key feature of Diagram 8-13 which allows Black to win is that White
does not have access to an odd-numbered (in this case one square, e1) region. Since
the total number of squares is even, the number of squares in the rest of the board
must be odd as well (in this case three squares, a1, b1 and b2). If Black can keep play
contained in the rest of the board, even-number theory is working in his favor. Black
will take the last move in the rest of the board, and then White will pass. Finally,
black will initiate play in the odd-numbered region which White does not have access
to. Since it is odd-numbered region, the player moving first, Black, will get the last
move in this region as well.
Diagram 8-17 shows another example of the same principle, but with 16 empty
squares rather than four. Here, white is walled off from the upper-left region of the
board, which contains nine empty squares. While there are many ways for Black to
win, the simplest strategy is to use even number theory. This tells us that Black should
leave the upper-left region untouched, filling in the rest of the board first. One possible sequence is shown in Diagram 8-18. Note how Black gets the last move because, excluding the upper-left region, there are an odd number of empty squares
(seven in this case). White passes, and then Black can initiate play into the upper-left
region, with e1 being the obvious place to start. Since the upper-left region is oddnumbered, Black will get the last move here as well, winning easily.

Even number theory
As these examples demonstrate, it can be dangerous for White to wall himself
off from an odd-numbered region. However, it would not be true to say that White
should always avoid creating odd-numbered regions. Diagram 8-19 shows a position
which has been reached many times in expert play. Here, White’s best strategy is to
leave Black’s long wall untouched, and play to the top edge at c1 (Diagram 8-20) or
d1 (Diagram 8-21). Even number theory suggests that d1 would be better than c1,
since c1 creates a three square region in the upper left corner that White can not play
into, while d1 would leave a four square region. However, player experience and
computer analysis tells us that c1 is actually slightly better than d1.
Considering only how the top edge will play out, most experts would agree that
c1 is the best move. In this case, that advantage seems to be enough to overcome the
awkward position created in the upper-left corner. Always keep in mind that the basic
strategy of Othello is to run the opponent out of moves. In Diagram 8-20, if White can
eventually run Black out moves, Black may very well be forced to move into the
upper-left corner sooner than he wants, and once again even number theory will work
in favor of White.
Diagram 8-19
White to move
Diagram 8-20
Black to move
Diagram 8-21
Black to move
Hyper even number theory
Even number theory tells us that it is usually a disadvantage to initiate play into
an even-numbered region. One way to ensure that you will not have to play into an
even-numbered region is to have no legal moves in that region! Even if you run completely out of moves in the rest of the board, you will simply pass, and your opponent
will still have to initiate play into the region. In Japanese, this is called hyper even
number theory, or just hyper for short.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
In Diagram 8-22, Black must play to either a1 or b1. In either case, White captures most of the top edge and wins the game. Diagram 8-23 shows the same position,
except that the disc on b2 has been made black. In this case, Black does not have a
legal move and passes. This forces White to initiate play into the region, and now it is
Black that gets to keep most of the top edge, winning the game. This difference is the
basic idea behind hyper even number theory.
Diagram 8-22
Black to move
Diagram 8-23
Black passes
Diagram 8-24
Black to move
Diagram 8-24 shows one common way that Black can set up a position which
takes advantage of hyper even number theory. Here, Black should begin with h8, as
shown in Diagram 8-25. If White does not wedge at h7, Black will play there next
turn, creating a mass of stable discs and winning easily. Thus, White must play h7,
leaving the position in Diagram 8-26. Now Black passes and White must initiate play
into the 4-square region in the upper right. The perfect play sequence is shown in
Diagram 8-27, with Black getting the last move, keeping most of the right edge, and
winning 36-28.
Diagram 8-25
White to move
Diagram 8-26
Black passes
Diagram 8-27
Black wins
Even number theory
Diagram 8-28
White to move
Diagram 8-29
Black passes
Diagram 8-30
Perfect play
Feeding the opponent
Suppose that in Diagram 8-24, Black plays to h7 instead of h8, creating the
position in Diagram 8-28. Basic even number theory tells us that White should move
into the odd region by playing h8, as shown in Diagram 8-29. However, Black now
passes, and White must play first into the 4-square region. Although White can capture the right edge, with perfect play Black holds on to win 33-31 (Diagram 8-30).
The only way for White to win in Diagram 8-28 is to create legal options for
Black in the 4-square region, which will eventually allow White to get the last move
in the region. This is called feeding the opponent. In this case, White should feed
Black moves by beginning with g1 (see Diagram 8-31). No matter where Black plays
on his next turn, White can now take full advantage of even number theory by playing
to the odd region, i.e., h8 (see Diagrams 8-32 and 8-33). This leaves 2 empty squares
in the upper-right, and since Black has access to one of the squares, White will get the
last move in this region, winning the game 33-31.
Diagram 8-31
Black to move
Diagram 8-32
After h1, h8
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 8-33
After g2, h8
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 148.

Exercise 8-1
White to move
Exercise 8-2
White to move
Exercise 8-5
Black to move
Exercise 8-3
White to move
Exercise 8-4
White to move
Exercise 8-6
White to move
Even number theory
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 9
Tesuji Part I
Tesuji is a Japanese word (pronounced te as in ten, su as in super, ji as in jeep)
used in games such as Go and Shogi, with no simple equivalent in English. It is
sometimes translated as “set moves” or “brilliant moves”. Tesujis are basically just
good moves in certain positions that arise often enough to merit special attention.
Knowledge of tesujis allows you not only to spot them easily when they are available,
but also to look ahead and set them up, or avoid giving your opponent a chance to use
them. This chapter looks at tesuji involving corner attacks, while Chapter 10 examines swindles and other tesuji.
The basic idea behind all of the corner attack tesuji is to make a move which
threatens to take a corner. This forces the opponent to either make a move that eliminates the threat, or give up the corner. When both of these options are bad for the
opponent, then the corner attack will be an effective move. However, it is important
to keep in mind that there are circumstances under which your opponent can afford to
simply give up the corner, in which case the corner attack may be a bad move.
Forcing your opponent to create a wall
Diagram 9-1 shows one pattern (similar to Diagram 5-11) that often occurs in
beginner’s games. White has just played b8, giving Black a golden opportunity to
attack the a8 corner by playing e8 (Diagram 9-2). In this case, the a8 corner is extremely valuable for Black, as it would allow him to jump to the a1 corner as well. In
order to avoid losing the corner, White must respond with f8, forming a huge wall
across the board (Diagram 9-3).
Diagram 9-1
Black to move
Diagram 9-2
White to move
Diagram 9-3
Black to move
Tesuji Part I
Diagram 9-4
Diagram 9-5
Diagram 9-6
Black to move
White to move
Black to move
Even in expert games, the threat of this tesuji is often used to great effect. In
Diagram 9-4, Black should move to f7, threatening to follow with e8 in Diagram 9-5.
White would like to respond with g8, but in this case he can not. White’s best move is
to limit the effectiveness of Black’s e8 threat by playing g6 (Diagram 9-6). Now if
Black plays e8, White can respond f8 without flipping the discs at f4 and f5. However, Black can continue with h6, flipping the disc at f6 back to Black and reestablishing the threat of e8.
Forcing your opponent to flip your poison discs
Diagram 9-7 shows a typical example of this tesuji. As the position stands now,
it appears that Black will have to break through White’s wall, playing g4, g5 or g6.
Black potentially has an excellent play at f3, but the discs at f7 and f8 poison the
move. In this case, Black can set up his f3 move by playing c8, attacking the a8
corner. This leaves White with little choice but to take the bottom edge with g8 (Diagram 9-8). This removes the poison discs, allowing Black to play a quiet move at f3
(Diagram 9-9), and now White must break through Black’s wall.
Diagram 9-7
Black to move
Diagram 9-8
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 9-9
White to move
Gaining access to a vital square
In Diagram 9-10, Black desperately needs access to h1, and can get it by playing
c8, attacking the a8 corner (Diagram 9-11). If White tries to grab the diagonal with
b7, Black just takes a8, gaining undeniable access to h1. Of course, White can take
the h8 corner, winning the bottom edge, but then Black continues with h1, guaranteeing him the other three edges and a comfortable victory. Note that if we modify
Diagram 9-10 slightly by removing the white disc on b8 and putting it on h7 instead,
Black’s c8 would not work. White simply plays b7, denying Black access to h1 (Diagram 9-12). It is the fact that Black is attacking a corner in Diagram 9-11 which
guarantees eventual access to h1.
Diagram 9-10
Black to move
Diagram 9-11
White to move
Diagram 9-12
Black to move
Diagonal grab
Diagram 9-13 shows a common endgame pattern. It may appear that Black has
lost, but there is a way to win. Black begins by playing c8, attacking the a8 corner;
White’s natural response is g8 (Diagram 9-14). With the disc at c6 black, now Black
grabs the diagonal with g2, and White is dead (Diagram 9-15).
Diagram 9-13
Black to move
Diagram 9-14
Black to move
Diagram 9-15
White to move
Tesuji Part I
Double corner attack
Diagram 9-16 shows a pattern which frequently occurs late in the midgame or in
the endgame. I have often seen players in this situation take the corner immediately,
fearing that somehow they will lose access to it. The problem with playing a8 in
Diagram 9-16 is that White will wedge with e8, and now Black is short of moves
(Diagram 9-17). It is much better for Black to play e8 himself, setting up a double
corner attack (Diagram 9-18). Comparing Diagram 9-17 with Diagram 9-18, several
advantages for Black are apparent. In Diagram 9-18, no matter where White moves,
Black will still be able to take the a8 corner on his next move, and White does not get
a wedge on the bottom edge. Further, instead of Black having to find a move as in
Diagram 9-17, in Diagram 9-18 it is White’s turn to move.
Diagram 9-16
Diagram 9-17
Diagram 9-18
Black to move
Black to move
White to move
Since a double corner attack almost always wins the corner, if the corner is
valuable enough you should not hesitate to sacrifice an edge. In Diagram 9-19, you
may be tempted to play g7, h7, or some other move, but Black will win easily after e8
(Diagram 9-20). This sacrifices the bottom edge, but Black will get a huge number of
stable discs as he sweeps around the left and top edges (Diagram 9-21).
Diagram 9-19
Black to move
Diagram 9-20
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 9-21
Black wins
Double unbalanced edge
In Diagram 9-22, White has two unbalanced edges facing the a8 corner. This
formation is nearly always fatal, because Black not only wins a corner, but can choose
which corner to take. In this case, Black has two possible corner attacks, a7 or b8. In
either case, if White takes the a8 corner on his next turn, then Black will wedge,
winning a corner. The two most natural sequences are shown in Diagram 9-23 and 924. The question is, which of these is better for Black?
Diagram 9-22
Black to move
Diagram 9-23
White to move
Diagram 9-24
White to move
This boils down to the question of which corner is more value for Black, a1
(Diagram 9-23) or h8 (Diagram 9-24). While h8 is certainly valuable, a1 is worth
much more. Not only does it allow Black to capture another corner with h1, but it also
gives Black a huge free move at b2. The point to keep in mind is that in order to win
the a1 corner, Black should begin by attacking the other corner (h8) first, playing b8
in Diagram 9-22. Note that White could refuse to play along with Black’s plan and
play somewhere on the g-column instead of a8. In that case, Black can follow up with
b7, in some sense sacrificing the a8 corner again while still threatening to capture the
h8 corner.
Stoner trap
This tesuji is named after John Stoner, one of the founding members of the US
Othello Association. I have saved this corner attack tesuji for last because it is more
complicated than the other tesuji that I have presented so far. When successfully
implemented, the trap guarantees the capture of a corner, but there are many circumstances under which the trap fails, some of which are very subtle. Further, as with all
of the corner attack tesuji, it is important to keep in mind how much must be sacrificed to set up the trap, and balance that against the value of the corner gained.

Tesuji Part I
Diagram 9-25 shows the basic setup for a Stoner trap. In this case, Black will
exploit White’s weak bottom edge to capture the h8 corner. Black should begin with
b7 (Diagram 9-26). Note that Black controls the b7-f3 diagonal so that White can not
take the a8 corner, at least for the moment. This leaves White with only two choices
which do not immediately lose a corner: e2 and f2. Suppose that White takes f2,
flipping the disc at f3 and gaining access to the a8 corner (Diagram 9-27).
Diagram 9-25
Black to move
Diagram 9-26
White to move
Diagram 9-27
Black to move
Black now launches a powerful corner attack with e8!! (Diagram 9-28). Black is
threatening to take the h8 corner, and the only move for White which does not give up
the corner immediately is b8 (Diagram 9-29). Unfortunately for White, playing b8
flips the disc on b7, the very disc that Black first played in Diagram 9-25. Now Black
can take the a8 corner, and then h8 on his next turn (Diagram 9-30). In this manner, a
successfully implemented Stoner trap always wins the corner attacked; if the opponent tries to defend the corner by taking the edge, he flips the X-square, losing two
corners. It is important to note, however, that a Stoner trap usually results in the loss
of the corner adjacent to the X-square.
Diagram 9-28
White to move
Diagram 9-29
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 9-30
Black takes h8
It is very easy for players (of all abilities) to get tunnel vision when they see the
opportunity to set up a Stoner trap. They focus so much on the tesuji that they forget
to think about whether or not it works out to their advantage. For example, consider
Diagram 9-31. Here, Black can play a Stoner trap with b7. This move will eventually
lead to black capturing h8, but how much is h8 worth? Since Black has an unbalanced
edge, if he takes h8, White will be able to wedge at h7, winning the h1 corner. Further,
playing b7 leaves White with a nice quiet move at e2, which breaks the diagonal and
eventually will allow White to take a8 and the left edge (see Diagram 9-32).
Diagram 9-31
Black to move
Diagram 9-32
Black b7, White e2
Diagram 9-33
White to move
It is far better for Black to simply play the quiet move e2 (Diagram 9-33), playing where White would like to play, and leaving b7 as a powerful threat. White could
grab a diagonal with g7 (Diagram 9-34), but now Black takes the other diagonal with
b7, and White is dead (Diagram 9-35). If instead White tries to stop Black’s b7 threat
by playing g2, then Black simply cuts with d8, winning easily (Diagram 9-36). Why
sacrifice a corner to play a Stoner trap when you can just run your opponent out of
moves instead?
Diagram 9-34
Black to move
Diagram 9-35
White to move
Diagram 9-36
After g2, d8
Tesuji Part I
Stoner trap varieties
So far, we have looked only at the basic Stoner trap. While this is probably the
pattern seen most often in actual play, there are a great number of variations to the
basic theme. Three of these are shown below. In each case, Black can play b7, follow
with an attack on the h8 corner, and eventually take h8.
Diagram 9-37
Black to move
Diagram 9-38
Black to move
Diagram 9-39
Black to move
Another twist on the Stoner trap is shown in Diagram 9-40. Here again, Black
begins by playing b7 (Diagram 9-41). White can break the diagonal with f2, but now
Black launches a corner attack with d8. If White takes the edge at c8, he flips the b7
X-square diagonally, losing two corners (Diagram 9-42). While this sort of Stoner
trap occurs relatively infrequently, in my experience it is often more effective than
the conventional type. The corner sacrificed is often not that valuable, and the attacker has greater chances of finding good moves near the sacrificed corner.
In the next section, we examine some of the ways that Stoner traps can fail.
Diagram 9-40
Black to move
Diagram 9-41
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 9-42
White to move
A funny thing happened on the way to the X-square
The most common reason that Stoner traps fail is that, after playing the initial Xsquare, the attacker is unable to make the corner attack on his next move. For example, consider Diagram 9-43. Suppose that Black decides to launch a Stoner trap,
starting with b7 (Diagram 9-44). Black is threatening to win a corner by playing d8,
but White can prevent this by moving to d2 (Diagram 9-45)! Black does not have
access to the critical square d8, and White has broken the diagonal. No matter where
Black plays, White will be able to capture the a8 corner on his next turn, and Black’s
Stoner trap has failed.
Diagram 9-43
Diagram 9-44
Diagram 9-45
Black to move
White to move
Black to move
Another common reason for Stoner traps to fail is that the opponent can safely
deal with the corner attack without flipping the X-square. Diagram 9-46 is a modified
version of Diagram 9-43. Here, after the sequence Black b7, White d2, Black is able
to launch a corner attack with d8 (Diagram 9-47). However, with the b-column entirely Black, White is able to play b8 without flipping the b7 X-square. See the exercises at the end of this chapter for more examples of Stoner traps.
Diagram 9-46
Black to move
Diagram 9-47
White to move
Diagram 9-48
Black to move
Tesuji Part I
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 149.

Exercise 9-1
Black to move
Exercise 9-2
Black to move
Exercise 9-5
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 9-3
White to move
Exercise 9-4
White to move
Exercise 9-6
Black to move
The problems below were created by John Stoner and first published in 1981. In
each diagram, determine if White can spring an escape-proof Stoner trap starting
with a move to b7.
Exercise 9-7
White to move
Exercise 9-8
White to move
Exercise 9-10
White to move
Exercise 9-14
White to move
Exercise 9-12
White to move
Exercise 9-13
White to move
Exercise 9-11
White to move
Exercise 9-9
White to move
Exercise 9-15
White to move
Tesuji Part I
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 10
Tesuji Part II
Swindles
Swindles are perhaps the most fundamental tesuji of Othello. As discussed in
Chapter 5, there are many situations where two squares form a pair: two squares such
that if a player moves to one the squares, the opponent’s best move is normally to
move to the other. A swindle occurs when a player moves into the pair, but the opponent does not have a legal move to the other square of the pair, allowing the first
player to get both moves in the pair. There are situations where a player can get both
moves in a pair because the opponent does not want to move into the other half of the
pair; a swindle occurs only when the opponent can not move into the other half.
Swindles involving corner/C-square pairs are the most common type of swindle,
and often the most devastating. In Diagram 10-1, a1 and b1 form a pair. If Black plays
a1, White will want to wedge at b1, winning the h1 corner-- presumably that is why
White played to b2 in the first place. However, in this case, Black can “swindle”
White, moving to a1 without giving White access to b1. Black can later move to b1
and wins easily. This situation can often be set up by using a corner attack to semiforce the opponent to take the corner on the opposite end of the diagonal. In Diagram
10-2, Black can win the game by attacking the h1 corner with h7 (Diagram 10-3)! If
White plays h8, he will create many stable discs, but the b2-g7 diagonal will become
all White. This allows Black to take a1 without offering White access to b1, which is
enough to win the game. Of course, White can play somewhere else, but then Black
follows through on his attack, winning two edges with h1.
Diagram 10-1
Black to move
Diagram 10-2
Black to move
Diagram 10-3
White to move
Tesuji Part II
Diagram 10-4
Black to move
Diagram 10-5
White to move
Diagram 10-6
Black to move
Diagram 10-4 shows another swindle in which one side gets both a corner and
the adjacent C-square. Sometime earlier in the game, White played to b2, hoping to
wedge at b1 after Black takes the a1 corner. Unfortunately for White, if Black takes
the corner now, White will not have access to b1 because the entire b-column is black
(Diagram 10-5). Black will be able to play b1 on his next turn, winning easily. A
common way to set up this swindle is to “extract” the discs the opponent needs to
gain access to the C-square. In Diagram 10-6, Black should begin with e7, extracting
the white disc on b4 (Diagram 10-7). Then, on his next move, Black can extract the
white disc on b5, setting up the swindle. For example, if White plays f7 (Diagram 108), Black can follow with d7 (Diagram 10-9).
In the examples above, the swindles involved taking a corner without giving the
opponent access to the adjacent C-square. When this swindle is not available, it is
sometimes possible to play the swindle in the opposite order, taking the C-square
without offering the opponent access to the adjacent corner. For example, suppose
that in Diagram 10-9, White sees that he is going to be swindled, and plays to b7 in an
attempt to gain access to b1 after Black takes the a1 corner (Diagram 10-10).
Diagram 10-7
White to move
Diagram 10-8
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 10-9
White to move
Diagram 10-10
Black to move
Diagram 10-11
White to move
Diagram 10-12
White to move
In Diagram 10-10, White’s move to b7 makes the entire b-column white. While
this prevents Black from getting a swindle with a1, Black can now get a swindle by
playing b1! Since this does not flip the disc on b2 (Diagram 10-11), Black will later
be able to take the a1 corner. Diagram 10-12 shows another common situation. Here,
Black would like to play b1 without flipping b2, but the black disc at b6 poisons the
move. Unfortunately for White, the only “safe” moves available are a6 and a7, which
flip the disc on b6, allowing Black to get a swindle with b1. As the above examples
demonstrate, before playing an X-square move to attack an unbalanced edge, it is
important to verify that you will not get swindled.
C-square/A-square swindles
While not as common as swindles involving C-squares and corners, it is not
unusual to see swindles with C-square/A-square pairs. Diagram 10-13 shows a situation similar to Diagram 10-4. Black can swindle White by playing b1! (Diagram 1014), taking advantage of the fact that the entire c-column is black. Black will later fill
in the hole at c1, gaining two-tempos. Another reasonably common situation is shown
in Diagram 10-15. Again, Black should begin by playing b1 (Diagram 10-16).
Diagram 10-13
Black to move
Diagram 10-14
White to move
Diagram 10-15
Black to move
Tesuji Part II
Diagram 10-16
White to move
Diagram 10-17
White b3, black d1
Diagram 10-18
White to move
In Diagram 10-16, White does not have access to c1 or d1. No matter how White
plays, Black can follow with d1, winning the h1 corner (Diagram 10-17). One point
to note, however, is that if Black takes the h1 corner, White may be able to wedge at
c1, winning the a1 corner (Diagram 10-18). In this case, the h1 corner is extremely
valuable and Black can still win easily, but there are some positions where this swindle
backfires.
Boscov swindle
This swindle is so devastating that most people fall victim to it only once. My
“one time” was in a 1980 loss to David Toth. Diagram 10-19 shows the basic setup.
Black may be tempted to play f7, trying to force White to play to the North (Diagram
10-20). However, White has a wonderful swindle with b8! (Diagram 10-21). Black
has sealed himself off from e8, so White will later be able to play both e8 and g8. This
loss of tempos allows White to win easily. While the Boscov swindle does not occur
very often, it raises an important point, which is that moves which flip discs next to
the edge can easily lead to a swindle.
Diagram 10-19
Black to move
Diagram 10-20
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 10-21
Black to move
Four in the corner swindle
This swindle is available surprisingly often, and is easy to overlook if you do not
know this tesuji. The basic pattern is shown in Diagram 10-22. With four empty
squares and Black to play, Black appears destined for a parity-induced loss. However,
the pattern of the four empty squares, as well as the fact that black has access to the
corner, allows Black to pull off a swindle. Black’s winning move is g8! (Diagram 1023). No matter how White plays, Black takes h8 and White has to pass. With this
tesuji in mind, look at Diagram 10-24. While this position is complicated, Black’s
only winning move, g8!, is not hard to find if you are aware of the tesuji.
Diagram 10-22
Black to move
Diagram 10-23
White to move
Diagram 10-24
Black to move
A-square/B-square swindle
In Diagram 10-25, White can exploit the position on the top edge by playing c1!
(Diagram 10-26). Black would like to wedge at e1, but in this case he does not have
access. Of course Black could take the edge with b1 (Diagram 10-27), but this is a
weak position subject to the sort of corner attack tesuji discussed in Chapter 9. If
Black plays somewhere else, White continues with e1, gaining two tempos.
Diagram 10-25
White to move
Diagram 10-26
Black to move
Diagram 10-27
White to move
Tesuji Part II
Diagram 10-28 shows another variation on this theme; this particular position is
from an opening that used to be common in expert games, and similar patterns occur
fairly frequently. Black has just played a6, inviting white to play a5 (Diagram 10-29).
While a5 is a quiet move for White, it flips the disc on c5, allowing Black to play a3
without flipping b4 (Diagram 10-30). As in Diagram 10-26, this leaves a difficult
choice between taking a bad edge with a7, or allowing Black to gain a tempo with a4.
Diagram 10-28
White to move
Diagram 10-29
Black to move
Diagram 10-30
White to move
Landau maneuver
This tesuji is named after Ted Landau, a former U.S. Champion. The position in
Diagram 10-31 is from a postal game where Landau played Black. While Black has
several moves which are good enough to win, Landau found a5!!, a shocking move
which crushes White (Diagram 10-32). The point of this is move is that if White takes
the a1 corner, Black continues with a7, making the entire b-column black (Diagram
10-33). If White continues with a8 (perfect play), he can not secure a disk on the bcolumn. Black essentially gets two swindles (b2/b1 and b7/b8), and can play into all
four empty squares in the column.
Diagram 10-31
Black to move
Diagram 10-32
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 10-33
White a1, Black a7
Diagram 10-34
Black to move
Diagram 10-35
White to move
Diagram 10-36
Other tesuji
Inviting a wedge
This is a nasty little tesuji that would usually be used to help run up the score in
a one-sided game. In many ways it is similar to feeding the opponent moves in order
to get parity in the endgame (see Chapter 8). Diagram 10-34 shows the basic pattern.
Not only has White run completely out of moves, but Black also has a free move
available at b2. Black can take full advantage of the situation by playing f8! (Diagram
10-35). At first, this appears to be a bad move, because White can simply wedge at
e8. However, Black now takes his free move at b2, and White is forced to “unwedge”
with g8, giving Black the h8 corner (Diagram 10-36). Of course, in Diagram 10-35,
White can (and should) play f7, but this leaves Black with another free move at e8.
Diagonal grab to get 3 of 4 in corner
This tesuji appears with great frequency, usually
late in the midgame or early in the endgame. In Dia1
gram 10-37, Black has sacrificed the h8 corner in or2
der to gain a tempo. White appears to be under pres3
sure because he is walled off from the region in the
lower-left. He could of course take the h8 corner, but
then Black simply wedges at g8, and it is still White’s
turn to move. White needs to somehow gain a tempo,
and can do so by playing g2!, grabbing the diagonal
(Diagram 10-38).
Diagram 10-37
White to move
Tesuji Part II
Diagram 10-38
Black to move
Diagram 10-39
White to move
Diagram 10-40
Black to move
Of course, in this position Black can easily break the diagonal by playing a5
(Diagram 10-40), winning the h1 corner. However, this is exactly what White wants!
White responds with g1, in some sense sacrificing the h1 corner again (Diagram 1040). Although White loses the corner, he gets three of four moves in the region, gaining two tempos. A very important point is that since Black has broken the diagonal,
there is no swindle available. If Black avoids breaking the diagonal, say by playing
a4 in Diagram 10-38, then White should not respond with g1 (Diagram 10-41), because it would allow Black to play h1 without flipping the disc on g2. Instead, White
must wait until Black breaks the diagonal before playing g1.
Diagram 10-42 shows another variation of this tesuji. Here we can treat h4 as
part of the lower-right corner region, and White will take three of the four moves in
the region. White should begin with g7, grabbing the diagonal. If Black breaks the
diagonal, say with b5, then White plays h4, gaining another tempo (Diagram 10-43).
In this case, White must be extra-careful not to get swindled. If White flips the disc
on g3, or takes Black off of the whiteline diagonal, then White will get swindled.
Diagram 10-41
Black to move
Diagram 10-42
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 10-43
Black to move
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 150.

Exercise 10-1
Black to move
Exercise 10-2
Black to move
Exercise 10-3
Black to move
Exercise 10-4
White to move
Exercise 10-5
Black to move
Exercise 10-6
White to move
Tesuji Part II
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 11
Book openings
This chapter examines book openings, i.e., moves that are prepared and memorized before the game begins; an opening book is a collection of openings. As noted
in Chapter 4, novice players really do not have to worry that much about openings.
However, having well prepared book openings becomes vital as you come up against
stronger players. Rather than a long list of moves to be studied, this chapter is meant
to teach you how to go about developing openings of your own.
If you have played even a few dozen games of Othello, you have probably noticed the same patterns being repeated in the first moves of the game. If you remember what you did the last time you saw a certain position, you might make the same
move without really thinking about it. Or, perhaps the move you used last time did
not work out well, and you started to look for some alternative. While simply playing
games will eventually give you a feel for which moves are good and which are bad,
developing an opening book with the aid of computer analysis can make this process
much easier and more effective.
Example of developing an opening
Suppose that you are black and played the opening shown in Diagram 11-1.
Your opponent chose to play the “chimney” opening (6. d6), resulting in Diagram 112, at which point you had no idea what to play next. You want to build up your
opening book so that the next time this position occurs, you will be prepared with a
good response. The easiest thing to do would be to have a computer suggest a move;
suppose the computer recommends 7. g4, as shown in Diagram 11-3.
Diagram 11-1
Chimney
Diagram 11-2
Black to move
Diagram 11-3
White to move
Book openings
You might choose to stop at this point, and simply add Diagram 11-3 to your
opening book. The next time someone plays the chimney, you can play g4 without
having to think about it. That is all well and good, but you should be at least a little bit
curious about what White will do in response to your g4 move. In Diagram 11-3,
White has seven moves to choose from; searching the Thor database (see Appendix
for details) reveals that all of these moves have been played at least once. Ideally, we
would like to know what to do against each of White’s possible responses. We could
try each move for White, then ask the computer for a suggested reply as Black. Our
book would then look like:
Our move
8. e2
Our move
8. f2
Our move
(Four other move 8’s not shown)
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
6. d6
Our move
8. d3
Of course, once you have come this far, you may start to wonder about what
White will do after your move 9. For example, if White plays 8. d3 and you make
your prepared move 9. c3, this leaves White with quite a few reasonable looking
options for move 10. Looking the position up in the database shows that 7 different
moves have been used at move 10. You could again ask the computer to find a good
move against each of these 7 moves. The problem though is that if you put in every
possible response to each of your moves, the size of your opening book will grow
exponentially. If your opponent always has 7 possible moves to choose from then the
number of lines that you would have to remember will grow to 7x7 = 49, then 7x7x7=
343, then 7x7x7x7= 2401 and so on. To put that in perspective, when I won the World
Championship my entire opening book with both colors had around 300 lines. Even
for a computer program, which might have a million lines in its opening book, it is
impossible to include everything.
Thus, it is important to be very selective when choosing what to put into your
opening book. To help in the selection process, I actually keep two separate books.
One book has all of the research that I have conducted, and contains a lot more openings than I actually know. The other book contains “cheat sheets” for the particular
openings that I intend to use and want to have memorized. The cheat sheets are color
specific— if there is a certain opening that I might play with either color, it will
appear once in the section with black openings and again in the section with white
openings. When I am building a new opening, I will put all of the research into the
large book. Once the research is finished, I decide which lines to put onto the cheat
sheets, and then try to memorize those lines.
Of course, you still must figure out what openings to research in the first place.
For players who are just starting to learn openings, the obvious place to start is with
the games that you actually play. Naturally, in order to do that, you must keep transcripts of your games, or at least record the openings. Even if you are just playing
some informal games, it pays to keep track of your games. Have a computer analyze
your games and find your mistakes in the opening. In this manner, you can build up
your book one move at a time.
For anyone striving to become a world-class player, it is important to take a
more systematic approach to opening research, including studying openings that you
have not actually played before. Below I will try to make the process more concrete,
but first I want to offer a “big picture” perspective that might help guide you in your
opening research.

Book openings
The perfect game
Speculation on which side would win a perfectly played game of Othello seems
to be as old as the game itself. As even number theory was developed in the 1980’s, it
seemed that the advantage of the last move gave White a slight edge. Now with the
benefit of strong computer programs, it appears that a perfectly played game of Othello would end in a draw. While it will be a long time before computers are powerful
enough to prove this conclusively, until someone comes up with a way to win for one
side or the other, we might as well accept it as though it was fact.
One important conclusion of opening research is that while there are many ways
to play for White, Black has very few choices that lead to a draw. For example, Diagrams 11-5 and 11-5 show one opening sequence which appears to lead to a draw.
Black could change the order of moves 3 and 5, but other than this there are no choices
except for 7. f6, which is also a draw. At move 10, White has three moves that maintain a draw (b4, e3, and e6), and in response to each of these Black again has only one
drawing move. In the game shown in Diagram 11-3, Black effectively has no choices,
other than move order (e.g., moves 55/56 could be made before moves 53/54 without
changing the outcome of the game) throughout the entire game. If Black makes any
move other than those shown, White would be winning. Meanwhile, White has choices
at several points in the game, including four possible move 22’s.
As White, if you can just memorize the one sequence of moves in Diagram 11-6,
you can guarantee that you get a draw (if Black follows the sequence as well), or that
you reach a winning position (if Black makes a different move at some point). However, before you sit down to memorize this game, I should point out a couple of
problems. First, a draw is not a particularly good result under many circumstances.
You could not become World Champion by drawing every game. Second, there is a
big difference between having a winning position and actually winning.
1 55
51 43 28 37
57 53
2 52
30 41
42 54
3 56
25 39
4 16
38 45
5 15
27 46
6 18
23 13
31 44
7 50
40 20 19 21
60 47
8 49
35 29 32 22
33 59
Diagram 11-4
Diagram 11-5
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 11-6
Perfect game?

While Black has very few ways to maintain a drawing position, there are a huge
number of variations which give White a 33-31 win. Even the strongest computer
programs can not hold on to every 2-disc advantage early in the game. For humans,
even world-class players, 2 discs is not a significant advantage. In fact, in many of
these positions, it is more difficult to play white than black; in games between human
players of equal strength, Black will win more often than White.
Given all this, deciding on what book openings to use is not simply a matter of
choosing what are theoretically the best moves. Instead, in each particular game, you
must choose the moves that will give you the best chance of winning the game. There
are many factors to consider: your strengths and weakness, those of your opponent,
how many openings you are able to memorize, what openings your opponent knows,
the time limit for the game, and so on. Choosing openings is thus more of an art than
a science. What works for me probably would not work for you, and what worked in
the last game might not work in the next one. There are, however, three general principles that you may find useful.
1. Choose uncommon openings
Since there are no openings that lead to a forced win, and you can not expect to
play perfectly, in order to win your opponent must make more mistakes than you do.
Thus, we want to maximize the chances of our opponents making a bad move, and
often the best way of doing that is to play openings that they have not seen before.
As noted above, in Diagram 11-6, White has four choices at move 22 which lead
to a draw. Of these, e8 is by far the most common move— for quite some time, it was
believed that this move led to a win for White. Even after it was discovered that e8
was actually draw, it remained the most common move. Naturally, anyone playing
this opening with Black would know what to do against this move. Sometime in 1998
I saw several computer games with d1 at move 22 that led to good results for White.
After studying it I started playing this move, and won several games in a row with it
as my opponents had not seen it before. In theory, e8 is just as good as d1, but at least
at that time, d1 was much less common, and much more effective.
2. Choose openings which are easy to learn
Another way to make things difficult for your opponent is to play openings which
offer a lot of good choices for your color, but few choices for your opponent. For
example, while the sequence in Diagram 11-4 is theoretically the best opening for
Black, White has a lot of good choices while Black does not. This means that in order
to play this opening well with Black, you must study all of White’s options, whereas
your opponent need only study one of the lines. This is a heavy price to pay just to get
a theoretical draw.

Book openings
Compare this to an opening where Black has a slightly inferior position, but
Black has a lot of viable options, while in response to each of these options White has
only one move which maintains the advantage. In this case, you need only remember
a few sequences, while your opponent would have to know many. In my experience,
if you prepare such an opening, even world-class players are unable to maintain the
advantage for the entire game. Eventually you gain the advantage by knowing the
opening to greater depth than your opponents.
3. Do not accept worse than a minus 4 position
As noted above, playing unusual openings is a good way to get your opponent
out of his opening book. Sometimes, however, the reason an opening is uncommon is
simply that it is bad. In my experience, it is rarely worthwhile to play an opening
which computer analysis indicates is worse than minus 4 discs. The problem with
such an opening is it usually opens up a lot of reasonable responses by your opponent— even if your opponent makes a mistake, it may still leave you with a losing or
at best even position. There are plenty of openings to choose from which are both
rarely played and close to even, so there is no need to intentionally play bad moves
that leave you with a significant disadvantage. By the same token, when deciding on
which of your opponent’s options to prepare for, it usually does not pay to look at
positions where you are ahead by more than 4 discs; if you get ahead by that much the
opening has done its job.
Trade-off between goals
In general, there is a trade-off between the above-mentioned principles. Since
everyone wants openings which are good and easy to learn (principles 2 and 3), most
of these openings have been played before and are well known (violating principle 1).
Still, there are always new moves to try if you look for them carefully. Sometimes a
good opening falls out of favor for a while, at which point people start to forget about
it, offering a chance to surprise someone with it.
It is certainly possible to live only by principle 2 and be successful with openings even when they are well known. Some people specialize in certain openings,
playing them in every single game for years. Even if you study the opening, they will
know it better than you do, and thus have a good chance of beating you. This sort of
strategy will naturally lead to long book openings, and a lot of very close positions
going into the endgame. It is thus suited to someone who is good at memorizing
openings and at counting in the endgame (see Chapter 13).
Someone who hates studying openings but is strong in the midgame would normally focus only on principle 1 and choose to play unusual openings, even if it means
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
taking a slightly inferior position out of the opening. If the opening is so uncommon
that you are certain your opponent will not know it, then principle 2 is not important.
In such a case, you are not planning to beat your opponent with the opening. Rather,
you simply want to force your opponent out of his book and try to win by out-playing
him the rest of the game. If you are substantially better than your opponent at the
midgame and endgame, taking a position which is inferior by 4 discs is not an unreasonable price to pay.
Looking back at history, I would argue that no one who has taken an extreme
approach to openings has ever become World Champion. No matter how strong you
are in the rest of the game, if you always play bad openings to force your opponents
out of book, it is difficult to come from behind and win a high percentage of games. If
you take the other extreme and try to memorize commonly played computer moves
until move 60, you end up with a lot of very close games at move 40, and again it is
hard to win a high percentage of games. For most players, I suggest a compromise
approach: try to get your opponent out of his opening book, but do not resort to taking
bad positions in order to do so.
Using WZebra to develop an opening
In light of the above, let us think about developing a practical opening book to
use against the chimney (Diagram 11-1) as Black. Again, this is more of an art than a
science, and there are many factors which depend on your individual needs, but working
through a brief example should give you the basic idea. First, we must decide on what
to play at move 7. Table 11-1 shows some of the factors that we might consider.
The column labelled “evaluation” shows how WZebra rates each move at a search
depth of 24 moves. We could simply choose the move with the best evaluation, but
keep in mind principles 1 and 2. “Frequency” is the percentage of games (in the Thor
database) in which each move was chosen. Usually, the lower the percentage, the
better the chances are for knocking your opponent out of his opening book. Note that
there is some decision involved in which games to include in the analysis. I would
argue that any game more than 10 years old is probably irrelevant, and 5 years or even
2 years could be the cutoff.
“Branches better than -2” indicates the number of White’s choices at move 8
that WZebra rates better than -2.00. This gives some indication of how many moves
we will have to include if we want to extend our book to move 9. In practice, we
would normally want to look further out along the tree to see how many good options
each side has. Again, by principle 2, we want a lot of options for Black, and few
options for White. Note that -2 as the cutoff is arbitrary; for some openings I might
use zero, for others -4 would make more sense.

Book openings
Table 11-1
Move
Evaluation
Frequency
Branches
better than - 2
White found
decent reply
Branches
frequency
>10%
- 2.38
- 3.75
- 2 . 16
- 1. 9 4
- 1. 0 8
- 2.98
100%
- 2.41
100%
Note: This table constructed with WZebra 4.2.1-- your mileage may vary
In that regard, the column “white found decent reply” shows the percentage of
games in which white found one of the moves included under the “branches better
than -2” column. After all, we are hoping that our opponent is going to make a bad
move, so it is good to know how frequently players have made mistakes facing the
same position. The column labelled “branches frequency >10%” indicates, following
Black’s move 7, the number of White replies at move 8 which were used in more than
10% of the games in the database. Again, this gets at the issue of how many lines we
will need to extend our opening book to move 9 or beyond. To be safe, it is best to
consider White’s moves if WZebra rates them highly or if they have been used frequently in actual play.
Given all this information, we can start to get some idea of the advantages and
disadvantages of each choice at move 7. The move which WZebra rates the highest,
g4, is played in a majority of games. There is only one good choice for White at 8, and
it is natural to expect that any expert player would know this move. Thus, playing g4
triggers a semiautomatic response at 8, and we need to research the opening from
move 9 onward.
By contrast, 7. c6 is given a slightly lower evaluation, but has been played only
3% of the time, which should mean that most players will not have studied it extensively. White has 2 reasonable choices at 8 and you should expect most of your opponents to find one of them, but with a bit more research at move 9 or beyond, you
might be able to stay in your opening book longer than your opponent. You must then
figure out whether that is likely to translate into getting an advantageous position.
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
One way to test a move like 7. c6 is to play out a few games against yourself,
trying some plausible-looking variations for each side. If you have not tried it before,
it can be tricky to play against yourself, but it is a very good way to practice and to
develop a feel for an opening. Suppose that you used a computer to study an opening,
and reach a position where White is supposed to have a 4 disc advantage after move
20. When you play out the game for both sides, you might find that despite this theoretical advantage, Black ends up winning every time. In this case, you are unlikely to
be successful with the opening as White unless you memorize more of the correct
moves later in the game.
Conclusion
Although I would like to provide you with a surefire method for getting through
the opening with an advantage, it should be clear by now that there is no way to do so.
While complicated, the above analysis barely scratches the surface on all of the factors that you could consider when choosing an opening. There is simply no right or
wrong answer.
Regardless of the approach you adopt, it is important to spend at least some of
your practice time studying openings, especially if you aspire to be an expert player.
I strongly urge you to record your games and study the openings. Write down the
results of your research in a book, and make cheat sheets so that you can learn openings in a systematic way.

Book openings
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 12
Advanced midgame play
This chapter covers various elements of play in the midgame, roughly moves 15
through 45 in a typical game. We have already seen many strategies that are used in
the midgame, but here we examine midgame strategy at a more advanced level. As
with Chapter 11, this chapter is not meant to teach something that will immediately
raise the level of your play. Rather, I describe a way to think about the midgame, so
that (hopefully) your ability will grow more quickly as you practice.
Good shape/bad shape
The first very strong Othello program readily available to the public was Brutus.
While the program had relatively little knowledge of midgame strategy, it was able to
make up for this by looking very far ahead. Although it was certainly hard for me to
defeat Brutus, there was always something a bit dissatisfying about playing it. The
program made a lot of awkward looking moves, and it always seemed that it should
not be that hard to win against it. Somehow though, these moves usually turned out to
be not so bad after all, because Brutus was looking at millions of possible continuations and could “read” that these strange moves would work out in the end.
For humans, who have a far more limited ability to read ahead, it is much more
important to rely on general principles and especially what I call good shape. Basically, good shapes are patterns that will tend to work out favorably in the future, even
if we can not read out the position completely. In a position such as Exercise 3-2,
reproduced below, even set to look ahead only 1 move, WZebra finds the right move
(c7). How the game will proceed is by no means obvia
ous, but the right move is, because cutting quietly through
the middle is good shape. By contrast, bad shapes tend
to lead to problems in the future; these are the types of
positions that are often vulnerable to the tesujis presented
in Chapters 9 and 10. Of course, we want to make good
shapes when we can, but there are certain positions where
the best move available makes a bad shape. In general, it
is critical to read out the consequences of moves that
make bad shapes to see if they really work, while less
Exercise 3-2
reading is required when making good shapes.
Black to move
Advanced midgame play
Diagram 12-1
White to move
Diagram 12-2
Black to move
Diagram 12-3
White to move
Make the most of your opponent’s bad shape
Consider the position in Diagram 12-1. Suppose that it was Black’s turn to move
in this position. Black would not have any quiet moves available, and would be in
grave danger of completely running out of moves. In a situation like this, if White can
simply avoid opening up new places to move for Black, then Black would have to
play an unappealing move to the south. Breaking through Black’s wall by playing on
row 2 and opening up new moves for Black is simply unthinkable. Rather, White
wants to play to the east, but the question is where?
It might appear that g4 is a reasonable choice, since it a quiet move in between
the black discs on g3 and g5 (Diagram 12-2). However, Black has a good response at
h4 (Diagram 12-3). Now, White has no choice but to break through Black’s wall.
Although the black discs on g3 and g5 do form a bad shape, playing in between
them is not the way to exploit this shape. Much better for White is to play g6 (Diagram 12-4), which accomplishes the goal of forcing Black to play to the south. Further, White still has two moves to the east at h5 (or h4) and g4.
Diagram 12-4
Black to move
In fact, even if White let Black pass a couple of times,
and (from Diagram 12-1) played three moves in a row at
g6, h5, and g4, the result would still be favorable for
White, as Black would have to initiate play in the south.
As this demonstrates, often a good way to take advantage of your opponent’s bad shapes is to think about
playing several moves in a row with your opponent passing. In Diagram 12-1, White could get in three good moves
by beginning with g6, but would only get two moves starting at g4. Therefore, g6 is likely to work out better than

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 12-5
Diagram 12-6
White to move
Black to move
Next, consider Diagram 12-5. Compared to Diagram 12-1, the position is not as
favorable to White, since Black has some moves available to the north. However,
White wants to follow the same basic strategy of forcing Black to initiate play to the
south. In Diagram 12-5, Black has an unbalanced edge, and if Black opens up the
south, White could eventually end up with a good move at b7. As in Diagram 12-1,
White wants to try to gain some tempos by exploiting Black’s bad shape to the east,
ideally initiating play with g6, then following with h5 and g4. Of course, in Diagram
12-5, White does not have access to g6, but White can establish access by playing e2
(Diagram 12-6). Notice how this links all of the white discs together, which is often a
sign of good shape.
Black has many possible moves in Diagram 12-6. Either e1 or e7 would exploit
the fact that the e-column is now white. Playing c2 would deny White access to g6, at
least temporarily. Other possibilities are d1, d2, c7, d8, and e8. For White to thoroughly examine all of these possibilities would take a long time, but it would not be
difficult to verify that none of these moves will pose a great problem for White. Often, as long as the move we are considering fits in with the principle of good shape, all
that is required when thinking in the midgame is to make sure that, following any of
your opponent’s replies, you will have another move which makes good shape.
In the current example, in order to play e2 with some confidence, we might
check each of Black’s replies and come up with at least one reasonable response. If
Black does nothing defensively (playing d1, e1, d2, or c7), then White will have a
good move to g6. If Black tries c2, then simply playing d2 is certainly good shape. If
Black tries to poison g6 by playing e7, then c7 would be a very quiet response. If
Black tries d8 or e8, flipping the disc on d7, White must be a bit careful because now
a move to g6 would give Black access to g4, making it much harder for White to gain
tempos in the east. However, d8 and e8 are both bad shape and offer White some good
choices. After d8, White could play c7, c8, or e7; after e8, White has c7, c8, or d8.
Advanced midgame play
Diagram 12-7
White to move
Diagram 12-8
Black to move
Diagram 12-9
White to move
Look for ways to set up key moves
Diagram 12-7 shows a position from a game between two of Japan’s top players,
Hirohisa Tezuka (Black) and Hideshi Tamenori (White). Before reading further, consider for a moment where you would play in this position. Whether you are a novice
or an expert, e8 should jump out at you as a wonderful move (Diagram 12-8). A
novice might simply notice that this is a very quiet move, only flipping discs in the
middle of the board. An expert would further notice that the obvious reply for Black,
namely taking the edge at c8, is an ugly looking move. It would seal Black off from
the lower-left region and set up a quiet move for White at a5. An expert would also
want to play e8 in order for White to exploit a good potential move at g5. In short, the
shapes in Diagram 12-7 cry out for White to move to e8.
Now consider Diagram 12-9. Here too, e8 jumps out as the place White wants to
play, but for the moment he can not, because the e-column is entirely black. In the
actual game, Tamenori played f2! (Diagram 12-10), threatening e8 on his next move.
The game continued Black e2, White c1, Black d1, resulting in the position shown in
Diagram 12-7.
In Diagram 12-9, Tamenori came up with a clever
way to set up a move to e8, but even a not-so-clever
move such as c2 would have been reasonable. In the
midgame, it is important to be able to look at a posi5
tion and quickly identify the “hot spots” that each side
wants to play to. If you can quickly find the right move
in positions such as Diagram 12-1 and Diagram 12-7,
then you should eventually be able to find good moves
in situations such as Diagram 12-5 and Diagram 12-9.
Diagram 12-10
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 12-11
White to move
Diagram 12-12
Black to move
Diagram 12-13
Black to move
Bad shape: look before you leap
In Diagram 12-11, Black is in danger of running out of moves. If it were Black’s
turn to move, pretty much the only choice would be to play a6. White can therefore
put pressure on Black by playing a2 (Diagram 12-12). Now if Black plays a6, White
can just take back with a7. The question then becomes, can White get away with this
C-square move? The resulting shape is dangerous, because Black has several options
in the lower-left, while White is walled off from the region. A move like a2 is very
likely to result in White losing the a1 corner in the future. For example, Black might
play a7 (Diagram 12-13), sacrifice the a8 corner, wedge at a6, and then take a1.
In order to play a2 with any confidence, you must be able read ahead a couple of
more moves. You at least need to have some idea of where to move if Black indeed
plays a7. The key to understanding this position is to realize that White can afford to
lose the a1 corner, especially if Black runs out of moves in the process. Indeed, once
the position in Diagram 12-13 is reached, White would like nothing more than for
black to play a1, allowing White to wedge at a6 and winning the a8 corner.
White should therefore play b2 (Diagram 12-14),
offering
the a1 corner to Black. If Black refuses the
corner by playing b8 or c8, White can play a6, again
offering Black the a1 corner. This time Black has little
choice but to accept, and White can run Black out of
moves by playing on the bottom edge. Starting with
Diagram 12-11, if you can at least read ahead until the
position in Diagram 12-14, then you can feel reason7
ably comfortable about making a dangerous move like
a2, even if you can not read out the entire sequence
Diagram 12-14
until Black runs out of moves.
Black to move
Advanced midgame play
Diagram 12-15
White to move
Diagram 12-16
Black to move
Diagram 12-17
White loses
In the example above, White was ahead and made a bad shape to put pressure on
Black. In Diagram 12-15, it is White who is under pressure, but again the best move
is to make a bad shape. Here, White is walled off from most of the board, and his only
safe moves are on the left edge. White would like to attack Black’s unbalanced edge
with g7, but this allows a swindle, as a Black move to g8 would not flip g7. None of
the usual moves (a3, a4, a5, or a6) looks appealing, as they flip in more than one
direction and open up new moves for Black. Computer analysis reveals that all of
these moves lose by at least 12 discs.
The only way for White to keep the game close is to play a2! (Diagram 12-16).
This is a terrible shape, and would normally be a disaster. For example, if white tried
to play a7, he would be run completely out of moves in the sequence shown in
Diagram 12-17. However, in Diagram 12-16, Black does not have access to a3, and
can not launch an immediate corner attack. Diagram 12-18 shows one possible sequence, leading to the position in Diagram 12-19. While the left edge is still a liability for White, playing a2 leads to the gain of a critical tempo, and the position is even.
Diagram 12-18
Black to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 12-19
Black to move
Edges as shapes
Among Othello experts, there has been a lot of debate over whether taking edges
is good or bad. Looking at a position like Diagram 5-11, it is easy to understand why
most novices are warned against taking too many edges. Edges may be subject to
various attacks, and can also make it difficult to find quiet moves when the edges act
as poison discs. Certainly, simply taking an edge any time one is available is not
going to be a work against someone who has a reasonable idea of proper strategy.
While there is no true consensus, most experts would probably agree with the
idea that taking edges is good for gaining tempos in the midgame, but often leads to
problems later in the game. In terms of the current discussion, we might think of
most edge positions as bad shape, even if they are not immediately subject to attack.
If taking edges makes bad shapes, then you have to read ahead to decide whether an
edge is worth taking.
In Diagram 12-15, Black holds two edges which are adjacent in the sense that
they are both connected to the h8 corner. Holding adjacent edges can be a powerful
strategy, and experience shows that it is usually better to occupy adjacent edges rather
than opposing edges. While the bottom and right edges in Diagram 12-15 are both
bad shape, White has no way to attack them. In the process of taking adjacent edges,
it is often possible to gain tempos, forcing your opponent to build walls.
In some cases, it is possible to completely run your opponent out of moves in the
midgame by grabbing the long diagonal connecting adjacent edges. Diagram 12-20
shows perhaps a famous example of this, from the 1984 World Othello Championship. Paul Ralle of France, as White, grabbed the diagonal with g2! (Diagram 12-21).
Black can (and did) break the diagonal by playing a6, but White can again control the
diagonal with b7 (Diagram 12-22), winning easily. Note, however, that if the diagonal grab was not available in Diagram 12-20 (for example if the disc on e4 were white
rather than black), then White’s bad edges would give Black the advantage.
Diagram 12-20
White to move
Diagram 12-21
Black to move
Diagram 12-22
Black to move
Advanced midgame play
Diagram 12-23
White to move
Diagram 12-24
Black to move
Diagram 12-25
Black to move
Diagram 12-23 shows another example where a “bad shape” edge turns out to be
an advantage. This position is from the semifinals of the 2003 World Championship.
Ben Seeley, playing White, moved to h5 (Diagram 12-24), exploiting the fact that
Black does not have access to g4. Diagram 12-25 shows the position a few moves
later in the game. Note that Black does not have access to g3 or h3 because of the
block of white pieces at the bottom of the board. Black will at least get a good move
to b7 at some point in the game, attacking White’s unbalanced edge, but overall having this edge is working to White’s advantage.
Harmony of the discs
Anders Kierulf of Switzerland (among other places) once carried out a statistical
analysis of tournament games showing that the eventual losers of games had, on average, more edge discs in the midgame than the winner. However, as we have seen
above, there are many circumstances under which taking edge positions, even “bad”
positions such as unbalanced edges, is advantageous. One reason that the player with
more edge discs goes on to lose the game is that, in many games the player who is
losing will be forced to take edges in a desperate attempt to gain tempos and avoid
running out of moves.
In my view, the key to playing well in the midgame is to make the right edge
moves, keeping a balance between offense and defense. Taking bad edges can work
as long as you are receiving adequate compensation for it, either in terms of offense
as in Diagram 12-20, or in terms of defense as in Diagram 12-25.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move. Answers begin on page 151. Hint for Exercises 12-3 and 12-4: consider the answers to Exercises 12-1 and 12-2.

Exercise 12-1
Black to move
Exercise 12-2
White to move
Exercise 12-3
White to move
Exercise 12-4
Black to move
Exercise 12-5
Black to move
Exercise 12-6
Black to move
Advanced midgame play
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 13
Endgame counting
In chapters 6 and 8, we looked at strategies that can help uncover good moves in
the endgame. However, in many positions, the only way to find the right move is to
make an exact count. That is, you must be able to consider a sequence of moves for
the rest of the game, and figure out what the final score of the game will be. While I
explore techniques to make this as easy as possible, it still requires the ability to “read
ahead” and visualize what the board will look like in the future, which novice players
may find difficult. The first part of this chapter explains how to count the last two
moves of the game, which is relatively easy and should be manageable even for novices. The rest of the chapter contains some of the most difficult material in the book,
and is designed for more advanced players. Regardless of your current level, practicing endgame counting is one of the best ways to improve your ability to read ahead,
and can help you become stronger at all phases of the game. The Appendix discusses
software designed specifically for practicing endgames.
Diagram 13-1 shows a typical position where counting can be used to determine
the best move. The first step is to count the number of discs of your own color on the
board in the current position. There are several ways to count the discs, and experience will tell you which method works best for you. While speed can be important if
you are playing a game with a time limit, getting the number of discs correct is critical, so it is important to find a method that allows you to count accurately. Personally,
I count the number of discs in each column, adding from right to left. For example, in
Diagram 13-1, there are 7 black discs in column h, plus 5 in column g makes 12, plus
4 in column f makes 16, etc. With practice, it becomes
possible to just look at the column and know how many
discs there are without really counting. Of course, you
could just as well count left to right, starting in col3
umn a and ending with column h, but you are likely to
find that it is easier to add along columns than along
rows. Another way to count is to group the discs into
fives, which makes it easier to add the groups (count7
ing 5, 10, 15...), but I have found that this can make it
difficult to remember which discs have been counted.
Diagram 13-1
Black to move
Endgame counting
Having determined that Black has 26 discs in Diagram 13-1 (repeated below),
we will now count the number of discs that Black will have at the end of the game.
Consider what happens if Black plays a8 (Diagram 13-2) and then White finishes the
game with b8 (Diagram 13-3). How many discs does Black have? In Diagram 13-2,
Black has 26 + 7 = 33 discs; black started with 26 discs, got an additional five on the
left edge (a4, a5, a6, a7, and a8) and two on the diagonal (b7 and c6). When counting
a move which flips in two or more directions, it is often easier to add discs in this
manner, one direction at a time. In Diagram 13-3, White flips one disc back (b7),
leaving Black with 33 - 1 = 32 discs. Thus, if black plays a8 in Diagram 13-1, he will
have 32 discs at the end of the game.
Diagram 13-1
Black to move
Diagram 13-2
White to move
Diagram 13-3
Black has 32 discs
While it is possible to count this way, first calculating that Black has 33 discs in
Diagram 13-2 then 32 discs at the end of the game, which I would call the two-step
method, you can save a step by finding the score in Diagram 13-3 directly. After all,
when thinking about the move to a8 in Diagram 13-1, we know that at the end of the
game Black will not get to keep the disc on b7 because White will move to b8. So,
instead of crediting Black with this disc and then taking it away, it is easier to just not
count it in the first place.
If I were counting this position, I would start with 26, add five for the discs on
the left edge to make 31, and then add one for the disc on c6 to make 32. If you have
never done it before, it might seem as though this “shortcut” of going straight to
Diagram 13-3 in one step will make counting more difficult and error-prone. However, having spent years using both methods, I assure you that cutting out the extra
step will allow you to count both more quickly and with fewer mistakes. The difference between these two methods should become clearer when we consider what happens if Black starts with b8 in Diagram 13-1.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Beginning with Diagram 13-1, if Black starts with b8, the result is shown in
Diagram 13-4. White will finish the game with a8 (Diagram 13-5). How many discs
does Black have? In Diagram 13-4, Black has 26 + 14 = 40 discs; Black started with
26 discs, got an additional five on the bottom edge (b8, c8, d8, e8, and f8), five on the
diagonal (c7, d6, e5, f4 and g3), and four on column b (b4, b5, b6, and b7; note that b8
was already included above). In Diagram 13-5, White flips seven discs back (b7, b8,
c8, d8, e8, f8, and g8), leaving Black with 40 - 7 = 33 discs. Thus, if Black plays b8
in Diagram 13-1, he will have 33 discs at the end of the game. Since a8 leaves Black
with 32 discs and b8 leaves Black with 33 discs, b8 is the better move.
Diagram 13-4
White to move
Diagram 13-5
Black has 33 discs
Using the one-step method to calculate the number of discs in Diagram 13-5,
again start with 26, the count in Diagram 13-1. Black then gains five discs on the
diagonal (c7, d6, e5, f4, and g3) for 31 and three discs on column b (b4, b5, and b6) to
make 34. Finally, when White moves to a8, Black loses the disc on g8 (note that we
never added the other discs on the bottom edge to Black’s total, so there is no need to
subtract them now), and at the end of the game Black will have 34 - 1 = 33 discs.
Personally, I find counting this way much easier than calculating 26 + 14 = 40 after
b8, and 40 - 7 = 33 after White a8.
At this point I should mention another counting method, which I call the plus/
minus method. Above, we compared the number of discs at the end of the game, for
a8 and b8, to determine that b8 was better. Another way to choose a move is to instead
calculate the number of discs gained or lost. Comparing Diagram 13-1 and Diagram
13-3, we see that at the end of the game, Black will gain 6 discs by playing a8 (a4, a5,
a6, a7, a8, and c6). Comparing Diagram 13-1 and Diagram 13-5 shows Black will
gain 7 discs by playing b8 (8 new discs on c7, d6, e5, f4, g3, b4, b5 and b6 less one
disc lost at g8). Again, since the gain is larger for b8 (+7) than for a8 (+6), we know
that b8 is the better move.

Endgame counting
The main advantage of using the plus/minus method is that there is no need to
count the number of Black discs in Diagram 13-1. If a8 is +6 and b8 is +7, then b8 is
better, end of story. If someone gave me 5 seconds to figure out the right move I could
do it with the plus/minus method, but it might take me 10 seconds to count that there
are 26 black discs in Diagram 13-1. Moreover, if you do bother to count the number
of discs in the initial position, then the plus/minus method will still let you determine
the final score. In our example, if we calculate that b8 is +7, then the final disc count
must be the initial count, 26, plus 7, or 33.
If you never plan on counting positions with more than 2 empty squares, then
plus/minus is probably better than counting discs. The main advantages of counting
discs only become apparent as you start to count longer sequences. Often the reason
to count is not to determine the best move, but to find a move which is good enough
to win. If you are counting discs, and you find a sequence that will leave you with 33
discs, then you know you can win. If you find a sequence that is +10, is that enough to
win? The only way to know is to count the number of discs in the original position,
which takes away the main advantage of the plus/minus method. In fact, when I count
with plus/minus, I usually have a “target” score which tells me whether I have enough
to win. In our example, starting with 26 discs, the target would be +7; that is, if I find
a move which scores +7 or better, then I know I can win. However, in a long endgame
count in which you consider many possible sequences, it can be hard to keep the
target in mind. When counting discs, it is always obvious that 33 discs win.
Another drawback of the plus/minus method is that it can be confusing when
you are losing discs in the sequence under consideration. Suppose that you start with
45 discs but will lose discs during the rest of the game. It is obvious that finishing
with 33 discs is better than 32, but is -12 better than -13? Mentally counting “45
minus 5 is 40, minus 5 is 35, plus 2 is 37, minus 4 is 33” is easier than “minus 5 minus
5 is minus 10, plus 2 is minus 8, minus 4 is minus 12”.
Since you can use either the one-step or two-step approach, and choose to either
count discs or use plus/minus, there are really four different ways to count. While I
would strongly recommend using one-step instead of two-step, whether you count
discs or use plus/minus is really a matter of personal preference; you can certainly be
effective with either method. When I first started playing Othello, back when dinosaurs roamed the earth, as far as I know everyone counted using the two-step, plus/
minus method, and even today some experts count this way. Around 1990 I switched
to using one-step plus/minus, and it was not until 2000 that I finally started counting
discs. Having considerable experience using both methods, I would recommend counting discs over plus/minus for longer sequences.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Cancellation
Regardless of which method you use to count, a technique which I call cancellation can make counting easier. Consider counting out the position in Diagram 13-6
using the plus/minus method. To count the sequence Black a8, White b8, normally
we would say that Black gains two discs (a7 and a8) for +2, and loses two discs (b5
and b6) for 0. Using cancellation, we mentally pair the discs gained (a7 and a8) with
the discs lost (c5 and c6) and immediately get the result of 0 (see Diagram 13-7). To
count out the sequence Black b8, White a8, we can cancel four discs gained (e.g., c7,
d6, e5, and f4) with four discs lost (c6, d5, e4, and f3), leaving one extra disc gained
on g3. Thus, this sequence is +1 for Black (see Diagram 13-8).
Diagram 13-6
Black to move
Diagram 13-7
Black a8, white b8
Diagram 13-8
Black b8, white a8
Cancellation is most useful in situations such as Diagram 13-8, where the discs
to be cancelled lie on adjacent squares, or are at least close to each other. If the discs
are on opposite sides of the board, I find that it is usually better to just count without
using cancellation. If you have to keep shifting your eyes from one part of the board
to another in order to line up the discs to be cancelled,
it becomes much more likely that you will make a mis1
take. One exception to this is when there are a large
number of edge discs which can be cancelled, such as
Diagram 13-9. When considering the sequence Black
a8, White b8, it might pay to cancel out five edge discs,
yielding the result of +1. As I mention throughout this
chapter, through practice and experience you can dis7
cover whether this technique makes counting easier
for you.
Diagram 13-9
Black to move
Endgame counting
Branching
In the examples above, with only two empty squares, once Black chooses a
move the final score of the game is determined, since White simply fills in the last
empty square to finish the game. Once you start counting positions with more empty
squares, your opponent may have more than one move to choose between. It then
becomes necessary to think not only about which move you want to play, but also
about which move your opponent will choose in response. Even with just three empty
squares, this can make figuring out the best move much more difficult. For example,
consider Diagram 13-10.
Start
White
Black
a7 b8
White
a8 b8 a7 a8
Score
Diagram 13-10
White to move
Diagram 13-11
Possible sequences from Diagram 13-10
White can choose among any of the three empty squares, and after his move,
Black will be able to play into either of the two remaining squares. This means that
there are 3 X 2 = 6 possible sequences to consider; these are shown in Diagram 13-11,
along with the score for White after each sequence (e.g., after the sequence White a7,
Black a8, White b8, White will have 30 discs at the end of the game). Given this
information, what are the best moves for both sides?
If White begins with a7, then Black chooses between a8 and b8. If Black plays
a8, then White will end up with 30 discs, which means that Black will have 34. If
Black plays b8, then White will end up with 29 discs, and Black will have 35. Black
will naturally choose the move which gives him the most discs and gives White the
fewest discs possible. Thus, if White begins with a7, Black follows with b8, and
White will have 29 discs at the end of the game. Similarly, if White begins with a8,
Black chooses b8, and White will get 33 discs. If White begins with b8, both of
Black’s replies yield the same score, and White will get 31 discs. Since White can
score 33 starting with a8, but only 31 with b8 and 29 with a7, White’s best move in
Diagram 13-10 must be a8, and Black will reply with b8.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
The example above demonstrates how complicated counting the endgame can
seem when the opponent has different moves to choose from. The good news is that
in practice, we can simplify the process considerably, and it really is not all that
difficult to find the right move in Diagram 13-10. Suppose that you are playing White,
without the information in Diagram 13-11. The first step in counting this position is
to count the current number of discs for White, which is 24. Next, you have to decide
which of the three choices to consider first. Usually, the first move to consider is the
one which, without counting, looks the best. Suppose that you decide to start with b8.
Diagram 13-12 shows the resulting position, and White now has 30 discs (of course,
in an actual game you would have to see this in your mind’s eye).
Diagram 13-12
White has 30 discs
Diagram 13-13
White has 31 discs
Diagram 13-14
White has 29 discs
If we follow the logic of Diagram 13-11, we must now count the final score after
each of Black’s choices to determine which is best (for Black); only then will we
know how many discs White will get at the end of the game if he starts with b8. In
practice, the best way to proceed is to count the final score if Black plays to a8 (and
White finishes with a7), since this is considerably easier than counting the sequence
a7-a8. After Black a8, White a7, the only change for White is the extra disc on a7 (see
Diagram 13-13). Since White has 30 discs in Diagram 13-12, he must end up with 31
discs in Diagram 13-13. Now, to be sure that White can really get 31 discs by choosing b8 in Diagram 13-10, we have to count out the sequence if black chooses a7 in
Diagram 13-12. Perhaps a7 is better for Black, and White will get less than 31 discs.
Even without counting this sequence, however, one thing is clear: White will lose if
he starts with b8. The only question is how much he will lose by, and rather than
spending time figuring that out, it makes more sense to try one of the other choices in
Diagram 13-10. Suppose that you decide to try a8 next, which results in the position
shown in Diagram 13-14, where White has 29 discs.

Endgame counting
Again, we must decide which Black move to count first. In this case, b8 would
appear to be the obvious choice, keeping two discs on the bottom edge. White finishes with a7, and the final position is shown in Diagram 13-15. Comparing this with
Diagram 13-14, White gains four discs (a7, b6, c5, and c7), leaving a total of 33 discs.
Thus, it appears that White may be able to win if he starts with a8 in Diagram 13-10.
However, we must be certain that in Diagram 13-14, b8 is really the best move for
Black. If Black plays a7 instead, then White finishes with b8 (Diagram 13-16). Comparing Diagrams 8-14 and 8-16, White has gained five discs (b5, b6, b8, c7 and c8)
for a total of 34. Thus, if White starts with a8, Black can do no better than reply with
b8, and White will win 33-31.
Diagram 13-15
White has 33 discs
Diagram 13-16
White has 34 discs
Diagram 13-17
White has 29 discs
Now that you have determined a8 wins for White, you might want to stop counting and just play a8. However, suppose that you want to make sure that a8 is really the
best move. Then, you must consider White’s final choice in Diagram 13-10, namely
a7 (Diagram 13-17). With only 29 discs in Diagram 13-17, it is immediately obvious
that White will not get more than 33 discs (the score when White begins with a8), and
White can reject a7 in favor of a8.
As the analysis above demonstrates, in order to find the best move, it is not
necessary to find the score for every possible sequence. In this example we considered 4 out of 6 sequences, and in some cases it is possible to find the right move by
looking at only a small percentage of the sequences. This is especially true if we are
willing to accept any move that wins, as opposed to finding the absolute best move.
Still, branching certainly does make counting more complicated, which is why expert
players usually look for winning sequences without any branches. Some examples of
this appear in the next section.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Counting with more than two empty squares
This section describes techniques for counting positions with more than two
empty squares. As mentioned in the first part of this chapter, there are several ways to
count with only two empty, and naturally even more variation is possible when counting longer sequences. Below I go through some examples of how I count a position,
but I would never claim that this is the only right way to do it. Through practice and
experience, you can discover what methods work best for you.
As shown in the previous section on branching, counting with more than two
empty squares requires us to not only count out sequences, but to also think about
which sequences we should count. In Diagram 13-18, Black has three choices, all of
which will leave White with three choices, and after some of these sequences Black
will have two moves to choose from. Fortunately, we do not have to bother counting
out all of these possibilities. The key to counting this position is to use even number
theory (see Chapter 8) to help decide which sequences to count.
Diagram 13-18
Black to move
Diagram 13-19
After h2, a1
Diagram 13-20
After h2
No matter where black plays in Diagram 13-18, the upper-right region will have
two squares left, while the upper-left region will have one square (a1). Even number
theory tells us that White will probably want to play a1 on his turn, leaving Black to
initiate play into the final pair. Further, if Black starts with h2, then this creates a
hyper region (an even numbered region that Black can not play into), so that even if
White continues with a1, White will have to initiate play into the region. Thus, the
place to start this count is with a Black move to h2 and a White reply of a1. The
resulting position is shown in Diagram 13-19. Now the question is, where does White
want to play, g1 or h1?
There are at least two ways of handling this situation. One is to count the discs in
Diagram 13-19, then use this as a starting position to count both sequences (White g1,
Black h1 and White h1, Black g1). Using this method, we must determine the number
Endgame counting
of black discs in Diagram 13-19. In order to do this, first we count the number of discs
in Diagram 13-18, which is 23. Black’s move to h2 gives black six discs on the right
edge (h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, and h7) for 29, g3 for 30, and five discs on the second row
(c2, d2, e2, f2, and g2) for 35. White’s move to a1 flips the disc on b2, leaving Black
with 34 discs in Diagram 13-19. Now that we know this number, we can count to the
end of the game for both of White’s choices. First, if White plays g1 and Black plays
h1, then Black loses discs on f2 and g3 for 32, and gains the disc on h1 for 33. If
instead White plays h1 and Black plays g1, then Black loses the disc on f3 for 33, and
gains the disc on g1 for 34. Thus, in Diagram 13-19 White can do no better than g1,
and Black wins 33-31.
Another way to approach the same count is to figure out which move in Diagram
13-19 is better for White before calculating what the final score of the game will be.
In this case, we would use the plus/minus method, counting from White’s point of
view. Again starting from Diagram 13-19, after White g1 and Black h1, White will
gain three discs (g1, f2 and g3). If instead White plays h1, after Black g1, White gains
two discs (h1 and f3). Thus, in Diagram 13-19, we assume that White will play g1.
We are then ready to count, starting with Diagram 13-18 (at some point we must
count that there are 23 black discs in this position), the entire sequence Black h2,
White a1, pass, White g1, Black h1. First, I would notice that at the end of the game
black will own the entire right edge, gaining seven discs (h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 and
h7), for a total 30. Black also gets g2 for 31, three more discs on row 2 (c2, d2, e2) for
34, but loses b2 for 33.
In general I would favor the former of these two methods because it is easier,
although the latter might be somewhat faster, since we are going more directly to the
final position (in the former, we count f2 and g3 for Black then subtract them away
later). Practice will tell you which method works best for you, but I believe that when
the number of empty squares is greater, it becomes very difficult to handle the visualization required in the latter method. Further, sometimes counting to an intermediate
position such as Diagram 13-19 will tell you right away that you are either going to
win or lose. In our example the score is close, so we have to think about both White
moves in Diagram 13-19. However, if black had 38 discs at that point, then we would
know without further counting that Black will win, or if Black had 26 discs, we would
know that black will lose.
Having calculated that Black will win after h2, White a1, it is a simple matter to
conclude that after h2 (Diagram 13-20), Black wins no matter where White moves. In
this case, the upper-right region (g1 and h1) and upper-left region (a1) are independent. That is, whether White plays out the upper-right region first or a1 first, the discs
flipped will be exactly the same. Thus, if White plays g1 instead of a1, Black will still
end up with 33 discs.
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
If we want to verify that h2 is Black’s best move in Diagram 13-18, then we
must consider Black’s other options, namely g1 and h1. As noted above, even number
theory tells us that in either case the first sequence to calculate is a reply of White a1.
After Black h1, White a1, Black h2 is obviously the best choice. After Black g1,
White a1, the final two moves (Black h2, White h1) are forced. Thus, we need only
count two sequences, namely h1, a1, h2, g1 and g1, a1, h2, a1. These are left as an
exercise, but it is not difficult to verify that neither of these sequences matches the 33
discs that Black can get by starting with h2. In the end, it was only necessary to count
out four sequences to verify that h2 is the best move in Diagram 13-18.
Diagram 13-21 shows a position from one of my games at the 2001 World Championships. Finding and verifying the best move in the position is not easy; giving the
position to WZebra, it looked at 3,440 sequences before selecting h1. In the actual
game I did not play this move, but I did find a winning sequence which was quite easy
to count. First, I counted that White has 19 discs. Looking at the position, I thought
that a3 was a good move, taking four interior discs (b4, c5, d6, and e7); Black has
only one move, a2, leaving White with 23 discs.
Diagram 13-21
White to move
Diagram 13-22
White to move
Diagram 13-23
Final moves
Now, the upper-left region is still a hyper region for Black, and one way to deal
with this region is to feed Black moves in this region (see Chapter 8). I decided to
look at b1, which gives Black two choices, b2 and c1. However, b2 is terrible, allowing White to play h1, pass, c1, pass, a1. So, Black must move to c1. These two moves
give White additional discs on b1 and d3, but Black will eventually move to a1,
flipping the disc on b1. Thus, I added only the disc on d3, making 24 white discs
(Diagram 13-22). The rest of the moves, shown in Diagram 13-23, are obvious and
offer Black no choices. It is also pretty easy to count this sequence. White gains five
discs in the upper-left (b2, c2, d2, b3, and c3) for 29, and four discs in the upper-right
(f1, g1, h1, and h2) for 33. In this case, I really only needed to count one sequence to
find a winning move.
Endgame counting
Exercises
In each diagram, find the best move and determine the final score of the game
with perfect play from both sides. Answers begin on page 152.

Exercise 13-1
Black to move
Exercise 13-2
Black to move
Exercise 13-5
White to move
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 13-3
Black to move
Exercise 13-4
White to move
Exercise 13-6
White to move
Chapter 14
Becoming an expert
Although millions of people enjoy playing Othello with their friends and family,
most of them have no idea there are experts who study the game seriously or that
tournaments are being held all over the world . If you are interested in becoming an
expert, or perhaps even the World Champion, this chapter will explain how to do it.
Play in tournaments
While it is certainly possible to become a strong player by practicing against
friends, computers, or opponents on the Internet, nothing will raise the level of your
play as quickly as participating in tournaments. There is something special about the
atmosphere of a tournament, sitting face-to-face with your opponent in a game that
counts (if for nothing else than rating points) that can not be matched by playing
electronically. Not only does playing in a tournament give you a chance to play against
experts, but it can also spur your desire to improve. More importantly, playing in
tournaments is a lot of fun! Unlike some other strategy games, there are no professional Othello players, and gambling is not common. As of this writing, the biggest
prize is $3,000 for winning the World Championship, and most tournaments offer
only a trivial amount of prize money. In general, people play in tournaments for the
fun of it, and perhaps that is why the atmosphere is fairly relaxed. The best way to
find a tournament near you is to contact the Othello Association in your country (see
Appendix).
If the idea of playing in a tournament seems intimidating, keep in mind that
Othello players are generally very friendly people, and are always happy to see new
players coming to tournaments. If you are familiar with the ideas in Part I of this
book, you are certainly good enough to play in a tournament. In more than twenty
years of tournament play, I have never heard anyone complaining that their opponent
was too weak. By far the most common complaint about people coming to their first
tournament is that they sometimes play the first couple of games and then just disappear, which can ruin the pairings for the rest of the tournament. Although rules vary,
a typical one-day tournament would consist of six rounds with a time limit of 25
minutes per player. Adding in an hour for lunch and some time between rounds, it
will take 7 or 8 hours to finish the tournament. If you can not stay for the entire
tournament, then at least speak to the tournament director before you enter.

Becoming an expert
There are some extra rules which apply to tournament games. A device called a
“chess clock” is used to keep track of the time used by each player. It has two clocks
and two buttons which control its operation. The clocks are set to show the amount of
time allotted to each player. To begin the game, the player with white presses his
button, which starts Black’s clock counting down. Black makes his move, flips the
discs, and then presses his button, which stops his own clock and starts White’s. If
one player’s clock runs all the way down to zero before he hits his button to complete
his last move, that player time defaults. Although the rules used for scoring games
with a time default vary, the player who runs out of time always loses, regardless of
the position on the board.
In a tournament game, if you touch a disc to a square where you have a legal
move, then you must move there. Thus Othello is not like some games where you are
not committed to making a move until you take your finger off the piece. Further, you
must use the same hand to place the disc on the board, flip the pieces, and hit your
clock. When time is running short it may be tempting to flip with both hands to save
time, but the tournament director can impose a penalty on any player doing so.
If your opponent fails to flip all of the discs that he was supposed to, you have
the option of forcing him to correct his mistake. To do so, hit your button to start your
opponent’s clock and point out the discs that he failed to flip. If it is to your advantage, you are allowed to leave the board as it stands, even if your opponent realizes
his mistake after he hits his clock. By the same token, if you make a move, hit your
clock, and then realize that you forgot to flip some discs, you are not entitled to flip
the discs even if your opponent has not yet made his next move.
Practice intensively
One of the reasons that playing in tournaments is so beneficial is that it forces
you to concentrate on Othello for several hours in a row. Just as intensive exercise
such as weight lifting will make your body adjust by making your muscles bigger,
intensive concentration on Othello makes your brain adjust. It is certainly possible to
make progress playing a little bit every day, but becoming a top player requires at
least occasional periods of intensive practice.
In my view, the key to playing Othello at a high level is the ability to read ahead
and visualize what the board will look like after several moves. In fact, at the highest
levels of play, nearly all of the “thinking” taking place is visual. For example, scans
of Japan’s top Shogi (Japanese Chess) player showed activity concentrated in the
vision center of his brain.
The first time that I was able to really “see” what the board would look like was
during the 1981 World Championship. I had practiced quite a lot in the month before,
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
and then played 19 games over two days during the tournament. In the last game, I
was considering a move when quite literally I saw a diagonal of pieces turn from
white to black. It looked as real to me as if the pieces had actually changed color. It
was not until much later that I was able to visualize this well on a consistent basis. In
the summer of 1987 I visited Japan and pretty much played Othello all day for 3
weeks. By the end of that trip, when I looked at the board, it seemed to come alive, as
though I was watching a movie.
Practice counting endgames
Another good way to improve your ability to visualize is to practicing counting
endgames (see Chapter 13). In order to accurately count a sequence of moves in the
endgame, you must correctly visualize all of the pieces that are added to the board or
flipped. The level of concentration needed to do that is so high that you may find it
extraordinarily tiring. In my experience, novice players are usually unable to maintain this level of concentration for more than a minute or two. Pretty soon their eyes
start to glaze over, and it looks as though they need a nap. Although it might seem that
they are just getting bored, in actuality it is the strain of doing something they are not
used to that makes them feel tired or that their eyes can not focus anymore.
In some ways, counting endgames is like running in an all-out sprint. At first,
you may find it difficult to count anything more than two empty squares. My advice
would be to slowly work your way up, at first practicing by counting the last two or
three moves of your games. As your ability to visualize improves, you will be able to
count positions with several empty squares. At that point, it will really start to pay to
devote more practice time to endgame counting. The Appendix describes software
useful for practicing endgames.
Record and review your games
One of the best ways to improve is to review your games. WZebra can analyze
your games and show you where you made mistakes and how much those mistakes
cost you. Of course, in order to review, you have to be able to remember the games
you play, and it is well worth the effort to take a transcript of your games as you play.
Simply start with an empty 8x8 diagram, put in the initial four center discs, and then
write in the moves as they are made. I usually use a small notebook containing graph
paper, but it is not difficult to make your own transcript sheets using Excel or other
software.
One problem with taking transcripts is that in a timed game, it may seem like a
waste of precious seconds to record the moves. With practice, it should become possible for you to write the transcript after the game is complete, without using a board.
At the 1987 All Japan Championship, Takeshi Murakami played in nine games, inBecoming an expert
cluding two tie-breaker games that were held with 5-minute time limits. The following day, while sitting on a train without a board, Murakami was able to write down
transcripts of all nine games! Although there are not many people capable of that, it
really is not too difficult to learn how to write down your game right after you finish
it. At first you might only be able to write down the first 10 moves, but as you practice
you will make it further and further until finally you are able to record the entire
game.
Review transcripts of experts’ games
Besides the transcripts published in magazines such as Othello Quarterly, a large
collection of games is available over the Internet from the French Othello Federation
(FFO, see Appendix). These games can be examined using WZebra. When reviewing
transcripts, I usually try to put myself in the shoes of one of the players, normally the
stronger of the contestants. It is possible to think before every move, considering
moves for both sides, but this can get confusing, particularly if one of the players is
not very strong. When it is “my” player’s turn to move, I think for a while about
where I would have moved, and only then look at how the game actually proceeded.
Sometimes the actual moves turn out to be better than the moves I thought of, and
when this happens it can provide tremendous insight into the blind spots in my play.
While there are a lot of players worth studying, by far my favorite is the transcripts of 5-time World Champion Hideshi Tamenori. There are more than 200 of
Tamenori’s games in the FFO database, and I highly recommend playing through all
of them. I also recommend the games of 2-time World Champion Masaki Takizawa,
especially his games as black. In particular there is a lot to learn from Takizawa’s
defensive plays.
Play on the Internet
If there are no strong players near where you live, it is possible to find opponents
from all over the world on the Internet. If you want to play against experts, the best
site is probably Vinco Online Games (www.vogclub.com), although there is a small
charge to become a full member. You will find some of the world’s best playing there,
and compared to other sites, many of the experts seem willing to share strategy tips
with newcomers. VOG also features the automatic recording of game transcripts; a
large archive of transcripts is available for study.
Another good site for Othello is Yahoo Japan (www.yahoo.co.jp). Although it is
a bit difficult to set up an ID (unless you can read Japanese), the buttons and boxes are
more or less in the same places as they are on other Yahoo sites. It helps to look at the
bottom of the screen as you point at various hyperlinks, since the address usually
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
contains English words which will give you a hint as to what the link is. When registering your ID, use 000-0000 as the postal code, indicating that you are outside Japan.
If you can not manage to create your own ID, you can use the ID foreign_guest. The
password is guest. It is polite to type “yoroshiku”, which means something like “do
me the honor (of playing)”, before the game starts.
There are several sites where Othello is played under the name “Reversi”. Most
of these sites feature chat that could make a sailor blush. I would encourage you to
play on the genuine Othello sites as much as possible, and when you do, please keep
sportsmanship in mind.
One of my pet peeves about playing online is that most of the good players set
very short time limits, sometimes only 1 minute per game! One reason this happens is
that there are a lot of people who cheat by using WZebra or other computers to play,
and it is much harder to cheat in a 1-minute game. While it can be fun to be play 1minute games, it is not a good way to become a better Othello player. A steady diet of
1-minute games can create all sorts of bad habits, especially moving before really
thinking. By the way, if you are tempted to cheat with WZebra, I urge you in the
strongest terms not to. Almost everyone playing on the Internet has their own copy of
WZebra, and they are not on the Internet because they want to play WZebra. Sometimes I see people “playing” each other, both using WZebra!
Read Othello Magazines
Currently the only regularly published Othello magazine written in English is
the Othello Quarterly, published by the United States Othello Association. Back issues of OQ are available and are well worth reading (Othello Quarterly, 7 Peter Cooper Rd. #10G, New York, NY 10010). In particular, many of the earliest issues of OQ
featured articles appropriate for beginners. The USOA also sells “Othello: Brief and
Basic”, written by former U.S. Champion Ted Landau. Some newsletters produced
by the British Othello Federation are available online for free (www.ugateways.com/
bofmain.html). They offer a wealth of strategy tips and game analysis, and are highly
entertaining as well. If you can read French, the FFO produces an excellent magazine
(FFO, BP 383, 75626 PARIS Cedex 13).
Play in the World Othello Championship!
The World Othello Championship (WOC) has been held annually since 1978,
usually in late October or early November. Under the current format, each country is
allowed to send up to three representatives. The three-day competition consists of 13
preliminary rounds, with the top 4 players advancing to the best 2-of-3 semifinals and
finals. The results of the preliminary rounds also determine the team championship,
Becoming an expert
which goes to the country with the greatest number of total wins.
Each country has its own rules for choosing the representatives sent to the WOC.
Some countries simply select the top 3 finishers at their national championship, while
others have several qualifying tournaments, with the winners of those tournaments
earning the right to represent their country. If you would like to participate in the
WOC, the first step is to contact the national Othello association in your country (see
Appendix). If you live in a country that does not have an association or has never
participated in the WOC, it may still be possible for you to play. A good first step
would be to contact the tournament director, who can help guide you through the
process of being invited to participate. See www.worldothellochampionships.com for
details.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 15
Puzzles
Take a corner puzzles
Diagram 15-1 shows an example of a take a corner puzzle. The expression
“White in 2” indicates that it is White’s move, and you are asked to evolve a plan that
will enable White to occupy one of the board’s four corners on his second move. To
solve the puzzle properly, your plan must deal with every possible defense for Black
so that no matter what move Black makes he cannot stop White from occupying a
corner on White’s second move. White need not prevent Black from taking a corner,
as long as White himself can take a corner. The expression “or win” (see puzzle 9)
means that the side to play must take a corner or win the game in the number of moves
allowed. In some puzzles, the corner to be captured is specified. For example in puzzle
20, the a8 corner must be captured in 3 moves.
In Diagram 15-1, White’s first move should be to
b2. This allows Black only three options: a2, a3, and
b3. Whichever move Black chooses, it will turn over
the new disc at b2 and thus allow White to occupy a
corner (a1) on his second move.

Diagram 15-1
White in 2
Take a corner puzzles were popular in the 1980’s, but have largely disappeared
in recent years, which is a shame in my view. One problem with take a corner puzzles
is that, since the goal is to capture a corner rather than win the game, the solution is
often not the best move available. Indeed, the solution to the puzzle could very well
be a game losing move. Despite this esthetic flaw, I believe that working on these
puzzles will help you develop the ability to read ahead. Solving take a corner puzzles
is also a lot of fun! The puzzles below appeared in Othello Quarterly between 1979
and 1986. Answers begin on page 153.
Puzzles
Puzzle 1
Black in 2
Puzzle 2
White in 2
Puzzle 4
White in 2
Puzzle 6
Black in 2
Puzzle 7
White in 2
Puzzle 5
White in 2
Puzzle 3
Black in 2
Puzzle 8
Black in 2
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 9
Black or win in 2
Puzzle 10
White in 2
Puzzle 11
Black in 2
Puzzle 13
Black in 2
Puzzle 15
White in 3
Puzzle 16
Black in 3
Puzzle 14
White in 3
Puzzle 12
Black in 2
Puzzle 17
White in 3
Puzzle 18
White in 3
Puzzles
Puzzle 19
Black in 3
Puzzle 20
Black a8 in 3
Puzzle 22
Black in 3
Puzzle 24
White in 3
Puzzle 25
White in 3
Puzzle 23
White in 3
Puzzle 21
Black in 3
Puzzle 26
White in 3
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 27
Black in 3
Puzzle 28
Black in 3
Puzzle 29
White in 3
Puzzle 31
Black in 3
Puzzle 32
Black in 3
Puzzle 33
Black in 3
Puzzle 34
White in 3
Puzzle 30
Black in 3
Puzzle 35
Black in 3
Puzzle 36
White in 3
Puzzles
Puzzle 37
Black in 3
Puzzle 38
White in 3
Puzzle 41
White in 3
Puzzle 42
White in 3
Puzzle 43
Black in 3
Puzzle 39
Black in 3
Puzzle 40
White in 3
Puzzle 44
White in 3
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 45
White in 3
Puzzle 46
White in 3
Puzzle 47
Black in 3
Puzzle 49
Black in 3
Puzzle 50
White in 3
Puzzle 51
White in 3
Puzzle 52
Black in 3
Puzzle 48
Black in 3
Puzzle 53
White in 3
Puzzle 54
Black in 3
Puzzles
Puzzle 55
Black in 3
Puzzle 56
Black in 3
Puzzle 59
Black in 3
Puzzle 60
Black in 3
Puzzle 61
White in 3
Puzzle 57
White in 3
Puzzle 58
Black in 3
Puzzle 62
White in 3
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 63
White in 3
Puzzle 64
White in 3
Puzzle 65
White in 3
Puzzle 67
White in 3
Puzzle 68
White in 3
Puzzle 69
Black in 3
Puzzle 70
Black in 3
Puzzle 66
Black in 3
Puzzle 71
Black in 3
Puzzle 72
Black in 3
Puzzles
Puzzle 73
Black in 3
Puzzle 74
Black in 3
Puzzle 76
Black in 3
Puzzle 78
White in 3
Puzzle 79
White in 3
Puzzle 77
White in 3
Puzzle 75
Black in 3
Puzzle 80
Black in 3
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 81
Black in 3
Puzzle 82
White in 3
Puzzle 83
White in 3
Puzzle 85
Black in 3
Puzzle 87
Black in 3
Puzzle 88
Black in 3
Puzzle 86
Black in 3
Puzzle 84
Black in 3
Puzzle 89
Black in 3
Puzzle 90
Black in 3
Puzzles
Puzzle 91
Black in 3
Puzzle 92
Black in 3
Puzzle 94
White in 3
Puzzle 96
White in 3
Puzzle 97
White in 3
Puzzle 95
White in 3
Puzzle 93
Black in 3
Puzzle 98
Black in 4
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 99
Black h8 in 4
Chapter 16
Game analysis
The finals of the 2003 World Othello Championships were contested between,
appropriately enough, the two strongest players in the world. Ben Seeley of the United
States and Makoto Suekuni of Japan finished 1-2 in the preliminary rounds of the
tournament, and were the highest rated players in their respective countries. In the
first game of the best 2-of-3 finals, Seeley, playing white, cruised to a 42-22 victory
(see transcript). Suekuni thus needed to win the second game in order to get back in
the match, while another victory for Seeley would make him World Champion. By
the rules of the World Championship, the players reversed colors for the second game,
with Seeley playing Black and Suekuni playing White.
32 46
31 19
18 15
10 14
37 38
First game of finals
Suekuni 22- Seeley 42
Player profiles
Ben Seeley of the United States has achieved a meteoric rise through the ranks
in his short career as an Othello player. His first tournament was in 2000, and by 2001
he was the U.S. champion. He went on to finish second at the World Championship in
2002. Seeley is the strongest of what I call the “new breed” of players, people who
became experts mainly by playing over the Internet.
Makoto Suekuni of Japan is the “Tiger Woods” of Othello, having played well
from a very young age. He won an open tournament at the age of 10, and has won
every major tournament at least once, including the All Japan Championship, Student
Meijin, Meijin, Paris Open, Tokyo Open, and Mind Sport Olympiad. He won the
World Championship in 1997.
Game analysis
Diagram 16-1
Diagram 16-2
Diagram 16-3
The second game of the finals began with Suekuni choosing the perpendicular
opening at move 2. Although Suekuni sometimes plays the diagonal, in recent years
he has mainly used the perpendicular. Seeley continued with 3. f6, the most common
choice for Black against the perpendicular in recent years, although c6, d6, and e6 are
all reasonable alternatives. At move 4, Suekuni again chose the most common move,
f5. White could play e3 or even d2 here, but these moves leave Black with a small
advantage.
At move 5, Black has only one reasonable choice, namely e6, connecting his
pieces while splitting White’s discs. Indeed it is the strength of this move which makes
3. f6 so appealing for Black. These first five moves are called the “Tiger” opening,
supposedly because the shape resembles a tiger (this is slightly easier to imagine if
move one is made at f5). At move 6, e3 is by far the most common move, playing
quietly in the center of the board and setting up a threat to play f4. Occasionally
playing to the outside with d7 or even f7 is used as a “change-up” by White when
trying to drive Black out of his opening book early in the game.
Diagram 16-4
Diagram 16-5
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 16-6
Diagram 16-7
Diagram 16-8
Diagram 16-9
At move 7, Black wants to do something to prevent White from moving to f4.
One possibility is for Black to play f4 himself, but more commonly Black makes a
move which flips the white disc on d4. The most natural looking move is d6, flipping
two discs in the center of the board, but as discussed in Chapter 11, this move tends to
give White a lot of viable variations in the opening. Seeley’s choice, 7. c3, offers
black a lot of possibilities for his next few moves. At move 8, White usually tries to
set up a good move on row 4 by playing f3, d2, or even e7. At move 9, Black must do
something to prevent White from playing c4. Seeley chose to play there himself, but
flipping the white disc on e4 by playing f4 or e2 are reasonable alternatives.
At move 10, Suekuni came through the middle with b4, the first move of the
game that flipped more than one disc. White is threatening to follow with d6, and
Black has no way of preventing this move, so he usually tries to make d6 less attractive for White by playing 11. b5 (the move Seeley chose) or 11. c6. At move 12,
White almost always plays toward the outside at c2. Although 12. d6 is a reasonable
play, black can respond with c6, leaving White with little choice but to play c2 anyway. It is therefore better for White to keep his options open and play straight to c2 at
move 12.
Diagram 16-10
Diagram 16-11
Diagram 16-12
Game analysis
Diagram 16-13
Diagram 16-14
Diagram 16-15
At move 13, Black wants to prevent White from playing d2. Black playing 13.
d2 himself is the classic move, but in recent years it has become more popular to flip
the white disc on b4. At 14, White could play d6, but again this gives Black an easy
response at c6, so White usually chooses 14. b3. Black can play 15. c1, starting to
establish adjacent edges, but Seeley’s choice of 15. d2, playing in the middle, was
more popular at the time of this match.
At 16, a4 appears tempting for White, flipping quietly in the middle. However,
Black plays a5, and now that the a4-a5 pair is filled in, Black’s free move at a2 becomes a much more valuable threat. Suekuni chose, 16. c1, the most common choice
for White, although the odd-looking 16. e2 also works out reasonably well. At 17,
Black does not want to flip the white disc on f5, as this would open the possibility of
White playing a5 without flipping b5. The position after Seeley’s 17. e1 was one that
Suekuni was prepared for, as Seeley had played this exact same opening 4 times at the
2002 World Championships. At 18, White usually plays e2, e7, or a4, but Suekuni
came up with a new move, 18. d7. Unfortunately for Suekuni, it seems that Seeley
had seen this “new” move before. While moves jutting diagonally to the outside like
18. d7 are usually bad moves, in this case it seems to work out well for White.
Diagram 16-16
Diagram 16-17
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 16-18
Diagram 16-19
Diagram 16-20
Diagram 16-21
Comparing Diagram 16-19 and Diagram 16-17, the only difference is the extra
discs on d7 and e7. It might seem that this is an even trade-off, but adding extra discs
such as these usually work against the player making the diagonal move (White’s 18.
d7 in this case). The reason is that in Diagram 16-17, Black does not have any moves
in the south, while in Diagram 16-19, Black can use the disc on d7 to make a move.
Giving your opponent the option to make a move in a region that he was walled off
from is often a bad idea, unless of course there are no other moves available. In this
particular case though, 18. d7 seems to be a good move, and the reason finally becomes apparent after White’s move 26.
Following the exchange at moves 18 and 19, Suekuni followed with 20. a4.
Seeley could not afford to give up two tempos by allowing White to play a2. He
therefore took the edge with 21. a5. However, White now has a disc on the d-column,
and is able to play a quiet move with 22. d6. This also sets up a huge threat for White
at f4, and Black has little choice but to play defense with 23. c6. Suekuni continued
with 24. a6, again threatening to gain two tempos unless Black takes the unbalanced
edge at a7.
Diagram 16-22
Diagram 16-23
Diagram 16-24
Game analysis
Diagram 16-25
Diagram 16-26
Diagram 16-26b
At move 25, Black again can not afford to allow White play a2, and therefore
Seeley took the unbalanced edge with a7. Of course, in this case, the white disc on b3
offers Black the prospect of balancing his edge by playing a2. At 26, Suekuni made
the quiet move to b6, and now the advantage of 18. d7 is revealed. In Diagram 16-26,
White is threatening to make an excellent move to c7. Although Black could play 27.
a2, White would just play c7; the resulting position is shown in Diagram 16-26b.
Notice how Black does not have an attractive move to the south, while White has a
potentially valuable move at f8, flipping the disc on e7, i.e., the extra disc Black
played in the exchange at move 18-19.
Presumably Seeley saw the problem with playing a2 and chose 27. d8, using the
disc on d7 before White can play to c7. Now if White plays 28. c7, Black can just
play c8. Suekuni eventually chose 28. b2, which was the right idea but the wrong
move. White wants to prevent Black from playing a2, and attacking the unbalanced
edge with b2 certainly accomplishes that. However, White’s best move was 28. c8,
denying Black’s access to a2 by flipping the disc on e6 (Diagram 16-28b). Computer
analysis reveals that after playing 28. b2, Suekuni was behind the rest of the game.
Diagram 16-27
Diagram 16-28
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 16-28b
Diagram 16-29
Diagram 16-30
Diagram 16-31
One of the problems with 28. b2 is that it allowed Seeley to make a quiet move
at c7. Suekuni might have been thinking that if Seeley ever took the a1 corner, he
could wedge at a2, gaining access to the a8 corner. In that case, the Black disc on c7
could allow White to use the four in the corner swindle (see Diagram 10-22). Another
problem with 28. b2 is that White can not flip the disc on d2, because this would
allow Black a swindle by playing a2 without flipping b2. A third problem is that, as in
the actual game, a1-a2-b1 is likely to become an odd (3-square) region that White can
not move into, losing parity. At 30, White has little choice but to play f8, threatening
to follow with f4. Seeley then played an excellent defensive move with 31. f2! If
White now plays f4, it would flip d2, again giving Black a swindle with a2.
Suekuni played 32. g5; the main appeal of this move is that it sets up a quiet
move to f7. Computer analysis reveals that 32.e2 was slightly better. Although e2
would flip the critical disc on d2, it makes a link with the black disc on f2, so that a
Black move to a2 would still flip b2. The game continued with Seeley playing 33. e8,
allowing White to get in his quiet move at f7. Exchanging Black e8 for White f7
reduced Seeley’s advantage from 6 discs to 4 discs. It turns out to be slightly better to
play 33. g3 (the move Seeley played at 35) without putting in the e8-f7 exchange.
Diagram 16-32
Diagram 16-33
Diagram 16-34
Game analysis
Diagram 16-35
Diagram 16-36
Diagram 16-37
After Seeley’s 35. g3, Suekuni played d1, flipping the critical disc on d2. This
move takes advantage of the fact that Black does not have access to a2 at the moment.
Seeley reestablished access to a2 with 37. f4, powerfully playing through the middle
of the board. Suekuni continued with 38. e2, which again links up the black disc on
f2, poisoning Black’s move to a2 and preventing the swindle.
At 39, Seeley played f1, which in my view was the worst move he made in the
game, even though computer analysis shows that Black is still winning by 2 discs
after this move. Looking at Diagram 16-38, White can not move to f1, since this
would flip the black disc on f2 and set up the a2-a1 swindle for Black. Meanwhile,
White is threatening to make a quiet move at g4. It therefore makes sense for Black to
play g4 himself at 39. Fortunately for Seeley, Suekuni did not take advantage of the
situation, playing 40. h3 instead of the obvious g4. It is hard to say what Suekuni
found appealing about h3. Perhaps he was hoping that Seeley would play g4, which is
no longer a good move now that f1 has been filled in. Regardless, after 40. h3, Black
now has 5 winning options (g2, g6, g8, h5, and h6), making it much easier for Seeley
to close out the game.
Diagram 16-38
Diagram 16-39
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 16-40
Diagram 16-41
Diagram 16-41b
Diagram 16-42
Computer analysis shows that 41. h5 was the best move, winning by 8, but Seeley
chose g2 (winning by 4), which is more intuitive for humans. This is an example of
the tesuji shown in Diagram 10-37, grabbing a diagonal and getting 3 of 4 moves in a
corner region. If White tries 42. g4, Black plays h2, gaining two tempos in the upperright, which would seal the coffin on White (see Diagram 16-41b). Suekuni instead
played 42. c8, which keeps the game close. Although this breaks the diagonal, Black
can not play 43. h2, because this would allow White to play g1 without flipping g2. It
may seem tempting for Black to regain control of the diagonal by playing 43. b7, but
this does not work either, as White could just break the diagonal with g4.
Black’s only winning move is the one Seeley chose, 43. g6. Now if White breaks
the diagonal with 44. g4, Black can complete the tesuji by playing h2. Although
theoretically the best move, losing by just 4 discs, 44. g4 keeps the position simple for
Black. Suekuni instead tried for complications by playing 44. h5, which at least gives
Seeley some game-losing options which look plausible, such as h6 or b7. However,
Seeley kept his cool and simply wedged at h4. This guarantees black access to the
critical square h2.
Diagram 16-43
Diagram 16-44
Diagram 16-45
Game analysis
Diagram 16-46
Diagram 16-47
Diagram 16-48
With fewer and fewer squares left open, White’s position is becoming increasingly desperate. The “best” move was 46. b7, but then Black can, for example, just
grab the a8 corner and follow with a1, guaranteeing Black can stabilize three edges
(the top, bottom and left edges). Instead Suekuni finally filled in the hole with 46. g4,
and Seeley completed his tesuji by playing 47. h2. White is still walled off from the
odd-region in the upper left, so that parity is working in favor of Black. Suekuni’s last
hope was 48. b7. Now if Black takes the a8 corner, he gets swindled when White
plays h1 without flipping the disc on g2.
It thus came as something of a shock when Seeley chose to play 49. a8! This is
certainly not the sort of move I would recommend to a novice (or an expert for that
matter), but it is not too difficult to verify that Black will have enough discs even after
getting swindled. White’s move to h1 does not flip along the diagonal, allowing to
Black to keep five internal discs (b7, c6, d5, e4, and f3). Further, Black gets to play an
extra move in the bottom-left (both a8 and b8) to compensate for White getting an
extra move in the upper-right.
Diagram 16-49
Diagram 16-50
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Diagram 16-51
1 54
Diagram 16-52
Diagram 16-53
Diagram 16-54
At this point, it appears that White has some hope of retaining parity by playing
52. g7. Although White is cut off from the odd region in the upper left, Black does not
have access to g1. Black’s only choices are to play into the even region in the bottom
right or the odd region in the upper left. If Black moves to the odd region, White can
play g1, leaving only even regions. However, there is one big problem for White.
When White plays g1, it makes the entire g-column white. This sets up a swindle for
Black, allowing him to play g8 without flipping g7.
In the actual game, Seeley played 53. b1, which loses some discs (a2 was the
best move) but is easy to count. Suekuni played 54. a1, but after 55. a2, there is no
choice but to play 56. g1, setting up the swindle. It is interesting to note that in Diagram 16-56, there are only four empty squares, and Black only has 21 discs. However, 57. g8 is a huge move. Not only does it flip a lot of discs, but it forces White to
pass, and now Black will get parity in the last region.
Diagram 16-55
Diagram 16-56
Diagram 16-57
White passes
Game analysis
Diagram 16-58
Diagram 16-59
Diagram 16-60
Seeley picked up another 7 discs on the last 3 moves of the game, enough for a
35-29 victory and the title of World Othello Champion! Below are six other transcripts from the tournament, including the preliminary round match between Suekuni
and Seeley.
33 31
1 56 60
28 39
25 26 29 40
1 54
51 34 30 31
41 42
25 24
2 55 58
27 21
12 24 41 34
2 55
50 43 33 29
39 58
3 36 42
14 11
10 31
3 23
40 59
4 43 35
20 32
4 24
37 60
5 44 15
5 47
20 14
35 38
27 10
37 54
6 45 22
17 16
6 26
21 15
12 36
7 46 51
49 18
19 23 54 38
7 49
56 16 11 10
45 53
8 52 59
47 50
30 48 53 57
8 57
46 17 13 44
19 48
Black: Makoto Suekuni 37
White: Ben Seeley
Black: Makoto Suekuni 33
White: Hiroshi Goto
Black: Ben Seeley
White: T. Kashiwabara 31
56 37 36 28
45 52
33 49
16 19
28 32
18 14
57 35 29 20
48 54
49 40
19 10
24 21
13 12
Black: R. Sperandio
White: Ben Seeley
27 28
17 32
30 16
39 13
22 19
46 12 11 18
41 34
50 43 14 25
53 44
Black: Ben Seeley
White: Andreas Hoehne 32
31 40
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Black: Makoto Suekuni 29
White: E. Caspard
Appendix
Internet resources
There is an abundance of useful Othello websites on the Internet. The list below
represents only a small fraction of what is available.
WZebra www.nada.kth.se/~gunnar/othello.html
WZebra, written by Gunnar Andersson and Lars Ivansson, is the Windows version of Zebra, one of the strongest Othello-playing programs in the world. Zebra
offers a full range of features, including the ability to examine the Thor database of
transcripts (see below).
Ntest www.btinternet.com/~chris.welty/Ntest/index.htm
Ntest, written by Chris Welty, is the strongest program available to the public.
Transcript downloading page ffothello.org/info/base.html
Transcripts of games played in most of the important tournaments held around
the world are collected by the FFO and entered into the Thor database, which now
includes more than 70,000 games. Thor is the name of the original program used to
examine the games in the database. Although the database is still maintained in Thor’s
format, these days most people use WZebra to access the games.
Icare http://othello.federation.free.fr/info/logiciels/
Icare, written by Luc Riviere (with help from Stephane Nicolet), is a program
useful for practicing endgames. A position from an actual game is shown, with between 6 and 12 empty squares. You must finish the game, playing against the computer, which always makes the best move. In each position, only one of your available moves is correct, and you must play perfectly to win (or draw). If you fail you
can try again as many times as you want, and if you really get stuck there is a “show”
button which will show the correct move. Icare is a relatively simple program, but it
makes practicing endgames fun.
Happy End www.nada.kth.se/~gunnar/othello.html
Like Icare, Happy End (written by Beppi Menzonni) allows you to practice endgames, but it is has many more features and is closer to playing in a real game. The
current version, Happy End III, uses WZebra’s endgame algorithm and is thus very
Internet resources
fast. The program draws positions from the Thor database, so you should download at
least some of the database files before using Happy End. Note that if you make enough
bad moves, the program will insult you in broken English!
National Othello Associations
Australia www.acslink.aone.net.au/sandhurst/othello
Britain www.ugateways.com/bofmain.html
Canada free.hostdepartment.com/o/othellocanada
Chezk Republic hrejsi.cz/othello/cfo/index.htm
China www.othello-china.com
Denmark www.othello.dk
Finland www.othello.tk
France othello.federation.free.fr
Germany www.othello-club.de.vu
Holland www.othello.nl
Hong Kong www.othello.org.hk
Italy www.fngo.it
Japan www.othello.gr.jp
United States www.usothello.com
Singapore www.othello.org.sg
Sweden www.othello.nu
Russia www.ase.ee/%7Egersimo/ario/arioframe.htm
Links
Bluez Othello links bluez2000.tripod.com/OthelloLinks.html
FDI's Othello links www.frankdh.demon.nl/othello
Blogs etc.
Othello Gateway othellogateway.com
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Answers to exercises
Chapter 2
Exercise 2-1 White should play e1, capturing the disc at e4, which will provide
access to the h1 corner.
Exercise 2-2 Black should play a2. Although this is a C-square, there is no
danger of White gaining access to the a1 corner. Further, this move flips the
disc at d5, which will allow Black to take the h1 corner.
Exercise 2-3 White should play a7, using the a8 corner to build more stable
discs.
Exercise 2-4 This is an extreme example of building up stable discs. The
correct sequence of moves is shown in the diagram.
Exercise 2-5 Black should fill in the hole at e1. Since White can not capture
this disc, Black will be able to take the a1 corner.
Exercise 2-6 White should play h4, threatening to take the h1 corner. If Black
tries to prevent this by playing h5, the white disc at h6 still allows White to take
the corner.

Chapter 3
Exercise 3-1 This is a possible continuation of Diagram 3-13. Here Black
should play a6, leaving White with no safe response.
Exercise 3-2 Black should play c7, flipping three internal discs. Note how this
move does not flip horizontally or vertically. Such moves are often strong as
the disc played is usually the only new frontier disc created.

Answers to exercises
Exercise 3-3 Here again Black should take the very quiet move g6, offering
White no new options.
Exercise 3-4 White should simply play h8, leaving Black with no safe options.
With perfect play, White can completely wipeout Black.
Exercise 3-5 As in Exercise 3-4, h8 might appear to be the obvious play, but
this would leave Black with several quiet options. Instead, White should play
the quiet move g4, and save h8 for later in the game.
Exercise 3-6 Black should play g5. Not only is this a quiet move, but it also
prevents White from taking a quiet move at g5 himself.
Exercise 3-7 The diagrams below show examples of sequences which force
White to concede all four corners to Black.

2 14
7 13
8 12
Exercise 3-8 The diagram below shows one sequence, with Black winning
55-8.
26 17
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Chapter 4
Exercise 4-1 Black should take the quiet move at f3.
Exercise 4-2 White’s highest priority here is to prevent Black from taking an
excellent move at c4. The best move is f6, flipping e6 and denying Black
access to c4.
Exercise 4-3 f3 is White’s quietest move, but allows Black a strong response
at c4. It is better to play d7, denying Black access to c4.
Exercise 4-4 This is a position which has occurred many times in expert play.
White has a large number of frontier discs, but has control of the center. White
should play a3, leaving Black with only 3 options, c6, f7, and g7, all of which
are loud.
Exercise 4-5 e6 may appear to be the obvious move, but White can play f6 in
response, leaving the same position as Diagram 4-8. Better is for Black to
play f3, leaving a position similar to Diagram 4-9.
Exercise 4-6 g6 or c6 are two good choices. If
you chose e6, you would regret it when Black
replies e7!!, completely wiping you out. This is
the prettiest of the many 9-move wipeouts, which
is the shortest possible game of Othello. Being
wiped out is always a danger that must be guarded
against when playing opponents who grab many
discs in the opening.
Chapter 5
Exercise 5-1 h5 represents a good quiet move for both sides, and both players
want to grab this spot as soon as possible. Since it is Black’s turn, he should
move to h5. If he moves somewhere else, White will take h5.
Exercise 5-2 In this case, if Black plays h5, it flips the disc at g6. White will
take the edge with h2 and be left with a free move at h7. Black’s best move
here is to play a6, taking away White’s access to h5.
Exercise 5-3 This position is taken from Diagram 5-18, with White playing
the next move at h5. Since h4 and h5 form a pair, Black wants to take the
Answers to exercises
other half of the pair and play h5. If Black moves elsewhere, White can play
h5 or h7, gaining a tempo.
Exercise 5-4 Black is out of safe moves, but can stay alive by taking advantage
of White’s wing formations. Before deciding which wing to attack, Black should
examine which corner (a1 or h8) is more valuable to him. In this case, a1 is
more valuable, since Black will be able to extend out along the left edge.
Thus, Black should begin his attack with h2. White’s best response is h1, after
which Black wedges at g1, gaining access to a1.
Exercise 5-5 White should play h6, leaving a 2-square gap at h4/h5. Black is
already in danger of running out of moves.
Exercise 5-6 Black’s move to g6 gives White an opportunity to pull off a
major coup with h7!! This is safe because Black does not have access to h4.
White will later be able to gain tempos by playing both h2 and h4 (I would
recommend playing this out on a board if it is not obvious to you).

Chapter 6
Exercise 6-1 Black should begin an interior sweep
9 11 14
by playing b1. The perfect play sequence is shown
in the diagram, with Black winning 35-29. Purists 4
(purists with computers, that is) might note that Black 5
can also win by an identical score by playing c1. 6
However, I would prefer b1, as it leaves White with 7
only one choice (a1), while Black starting with c1 8
allows White to choose between a1 and b1.
Exercise 6-2 White has many ways to win, but White’s best move is b2,
taking control of the diagonal. Black will be forced to flip b2 on his next turn,
allowing White to take the a1 corner.
Exercise 6-3 White should begin by playing h4. 1 5 6
Black has little choice but to reply with h5, his only 2
safe move. White can then play g2, taking control of 3
the diagonal and running Black out of moves. This 4
is another example of how it is often possible to 5
exploit a pair, in this case setting up a move to grab 6
the diagonal. The entire perfect-play sequence is 7
10 9
shown in the diagram, with White winning 42-22.
8 13
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 6-4 a7 is White’s only winning move,
breaking the diagonal and gaining access to h8.
Although Black can secure two edges by taking the
a8 corner, White will fill in at b7, and Black passes.
White will then be able to capture the right and top
edges with the sequence shown in the diagram. Note
that if White starts with b2 or g2, Black simply takes
the adjacent corner, and White can not wedge.

Exercise 6-5 Black should play a1. This is a swindle, as White does not have
access to b1. Black will later move to b1 himself, creating many stable discs.
Exercise 6-6 Black should play h7. White can take h8, gaining many stable
discs. However, this creates the position in Exercise 6-5! This example
demonstrates that it can be worth making a significant sacrifice in order to set
up a swindle.

Chapter 7
Exercise 7-1 Black is threatening to make a good move at f4, so White
should play to d2, flipping the disc on d6. Not only does this take away Black’s
access to f4, but now it is White that threatens to make a quiet move to f4.
Exercise 7-2 Black should prevent White from making a quiet move to f3.
Black could deny White’s access to f3 by playing c6 or f7. While these moves
are reasonable, in the case the best move is for Black to play f3 himself.
Exercise 7-3 Black threatens to make a quiet move to g4, and White should
prevent this by playing b5! Although very loud, this is easily the best move
available for White.
Exercise 7-4 Even in the endgame, it is often more important to consider
defense rather than offense. In this case, both players can make a quiet move
to b4. Since it is Black’s turn, he should play b4. If he plays f2 instead, White
takes b4 and Black will run completely out of moves.
Exercise 7-5 In this case, Black threatens to make a quiet move to g4, as
well as a strong move to h6. White could play g4 himself, but this would give
Black a good move to g3. Better for White is to play h6! While Black can get
a good move in at g4, with h6 already occupied, this still leaves White with a
solid lead.

Answers to exercises
Exercise 7-6 In this position, White appears to be winning easily. White has
already taken a corner, and has good move available at h2 and c7. However,
Black has the powerful threat of grabbing the diagonal with g2, after which
White can not break the diagonal. White’s only winning move is to prevent
Black from grabbing the diagonal by making the defensive move b7!

Chapter 8
Exercise 8-1 White should play to b2, creating three 2-square regions. Black
must initiate play into each of these regions, and White simply follows Black
by taking the last move in the region.
Exercise 8-2 White should play to a1. White could play into the odd region at
b7, but this concedes the entire bottom edge and Black wins. Since Black
does not have access to the a1-a2 region, no matter how White proceeds he
will eventually have to initiate play into the region. It is far better is to play a1
first, let Black wedge at b1, and then play into the odd region at a7 rather than
Exercise 8-3 Without access to the odd region (h2) it appears that Black has
parity. However, if White begins with a8, then Black’s only move in the lowerleft is b7, which flips the long diagonal and gives White access to h2. Thus,
Black’s best response is h2, and White will get the last move in the lower-left
(after Black h2, White’s best move is b7).
Exercise 8-4 If White play’s to a1, then Black passes, and White must initiate
play into an even region, losing the game. White’s winning move is a3, feeding
Black two moves (a2 and b3) in the region. Regardless of the order in which
Black takes his moves, White plays a1 and then gets a good final move at b2.
Exercise 8-5 This is an example of using hyper
even number theory. Black should play h2, sealing 1
himself off from the region in the upper-right. No 2
matter how White plays, White must eventually 3
initiate play in the upper right, allowing Black to get 4
the last move and the victory. The perfect play 5
sequence is shown in the diagram.
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 8-6 The key to understanding this
position is to view the 3-square region in the lower3
2 4 10
left (b7, a8, and b8) and g8 as a 4-square region.
3 1 5
White should move into the odd region in the upper
left, avoiding the lower left until Black plays into
g8. The question then, is where in the upper left
to move? The obvious choices are a3 and b3. A
bit of thought allows us to reject b3 in favor of a3.
8 8 9
The problem with b3 is that if Black plays
immediately plays to g8, then White’s only move
to the lower-left region (the only odd region) is b7, which offers Black free
moves at a3 and a2. By contrast, after a3, a Black move to g8 (either now or
in the future) is well met by b7, and White will be able to get the last move in
every region. The perfect play sequence is shown in the diagram, with White
winning 33-31.

Chapter 9
Exercise 9-1 Black should attack the h8 corner by playing h5. If White responds
with h4, this flips f2 and g3. Black can then run White out of moves by playing
Exercise 9-2 Black should attack the h1 corner by playing h3. White has little
choice but to reply with h7, flipping the Black discs on g6 and h6. This sets up
a good move for Black at c6.
Exercise 9-3 White should attack the h8 corner with e8, flipping the Black
disc on e5 and controlling the c3-f6 diagonal. If Black responds with d8, White
plays g7, taking permanent control of the diagonal.
Exercise 9-4 White should play d8, attacking the a8 corner from two directions.
Although this sacrifices the h8 corner and the bottom edge, White can later
take the a8 corner and sweep around the board, winning easily.
Exercise 9-5 White should attack one of Black’s unbalanced edges. In this
case, the h8 corner is more valuable for White than the a1 corner, so White
should begin by playing a7. Black has little choice but to respond with a8,
allowing White to win by wedging at b8.
Exercise 9-6 Black should attack the h8 corner by playing h3. If White responds
with h2, then Black can initiate a stoner trap with b7.
Exercise 9-7 The trap fails when Black responds c3, denying White access
Answers to exercises
to the attack square (c8) while establishing access for Black to the a8 corner.
Now matter how White continues, Black will be able to take the corner on his
next move.
Exercise 9-8 The trap succeeds. Even if Black plays e1, White still has access
to the attack square e8, because the move to b7 flips the disc on c6.
Exercise 9-9 The trap fails. Suppose that Black responds with e1, breaking
the diagonal. White must continue with f8, but this flips the disc on b4, making
the entire b-column White. Black can now play b8 without flipping b7, and will
be able to take the a8 corner on his next turn.
Exercise 9-10 The trap fails when Black responds g7. If White tries to continue
with f8, it flips the disc on g7, allowing Black to play h8.
Exercise 9-11 The trap fails when Black responds with c8.
Exercise 9-12 The trap fails when Black responds with h3, attacking the h8
corner. White must respond with h2, but now Black can take the a8 corner.
Remarkably, computer analysis reveals that White is still winning after b7!
Exercise 9-13 The trap succeeds. After playing b7, White loses access to the
attack square d8, but the only Black moves which do not surrender a corner
immediately (a3 and a4) give White access to d8.
Exercise 9-14 The trap fails when Black responds with d1. If White continues
with f8, it flips the disc on b4, making the entire b-column White. Black can
now play b8 without flipping b7.
Exercise 9-15 The trap fails when Black responds with a6. Now if White
plays d8, the b-column is entirely White, allowing Black to play b8 without
flipping b7. However, it is worth noting that if White plays b8 instead of d8,
Black’s only winning move is to play d8 himself. So, in some sense the trap
does succeed in winning the h8 corner.

Chapter 10
Exercise 10-1 Black should play f2. While this move is loud, it sets up a very
valuable swindle. If White plays b2, Black first fills in at e1, and later can
swindle White by playing b8 without flipping b7. If White plays anywhere other
than b2, Black can play a8 without giving White access to b8.
Exercise 10-2 Black should play a6. White’s only safe move is a5, but this
makes the b-column entirely White, allowing Black to play b1 without flipping

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 10-3 Black moves to h4, attacking the h1 corner. If White replies
with h7, it sets up a swindle, allowing Black to play a7 without flipping b7. If
White does not play h7, Black can take h1 on his next move, and White still
can not play h7 without allowing a swindle.
Exercise 10-4 Black is attempting to swindle White by playing d1 on his next
turn. White can prevent this by playing b5, denying Black’s access to d1.
Exercise 10-5 If Black plays g1, then White replies with b2 and Black loses.
Black should instead begin with a3. If White responds with a5, then Black can
continue with g1. If White now plays b2, then the entire b-column is White,
allowing Black to pull off a swindle with b1.
Exercise 10-6 White can get three of four moves in the corner by grabbing
the diagonal with g2. Black will break the diagonal on his next turn, and White
then continues with g1. Although White is conceding a corner early in the
game, the tempos gained are worth more than the corner. Note that Black
could deny White’s access to g1 by moving to b6, but this creates a huge wall
and leaves White with the advantage.

Chapter 12
Exercise 12-1 Black should play quietly to c2, with the potential for moving to
b3 and c4 in the future. This is the best way to take advantage of White’s
shape.
Exercise 12-2 White should play c6, making an excellent shape. This is one
of those positions that does not require much reading ahead to figure out the
right move.
Exercise 12-3 White has several reasonable looking moves, including the
quiet move f2. However, if White plays f2, then this results in the position
shown in Exercise 12-1. Black gets in a good move at c2 and threatens b3
followed by c4. WZebra indicates that the best move is f1, which at first glance
does not seem appealing at all. Not only does it offer Black a wonderful move
at c4, but it also puts a piece on the edge opposite the edge White already
occupies (c8-d8). The value of playing f1 is mainly defensive. Black can not
respond with c2, because this would give White access to c4. Of course Black
gets a good move in a c4, but after this neither b3 nor c2 is particularly good,
and there is no way for Black to play to both. In the initial position, WZebra
even prefers g4, denying Black access to c2, over f2. The difference between
playing f1, f2, or g4 is not big, but the point is that it is important to consider
how your opponent will exploit your bad shape.
Answers to exercises
Exercise 12-4 Black’s best move is, believe it or not, a2! In the 1980’s, a6 was
the automatic response in this position, but this allows White to consolidate
his position with a3. Black then has nothing better than the obvious move at
b6, resulting in the position in Exercise 13-2. The point of playing a2 is that it
threatens a6, allowing Black to gain two tempos on the edge. White can preempt
this by attacking the corner with a3, but after Black defends with a5, White
must initiate play in the north, leaving White with only a narrow advantage.
Exercise 12-5 Black should exploit White’s weak edge position by playing g7.
White can of course break the diagonal, but Black will eventually get 4 of the
6 moves (g7,g8, h4, h6,h7,h8) in the region.
Exercise 12-6 The obvious move here is b2-- unfortunately it is not the correct
move. After b2, Black does not have a follow-up response to White’s h4. The
usual move would be to play a3, semi-forcing White to take a1, and then
wedge at b1. In this case, however, playing b1 gives White access to d1.
Rather than b2, Black should begin with d1. If White responds with g1, then
b2 becomes an attack on an unbalanced edge. If White breaks the diagonal
with h4, Black can play the a3-a1-b1 sequence and win the h1 corner.

Chapter 13
Exercise 13-1 Black begins with 32 discs. If Black plays h7, White responds
with h6, and Black gains just the disc on f7, finishing with 33 discs. If Black
instead plays h6, White responds with h7. Cancellation is useful when counting
this sequence. Black gains four discs on row 6 (c6, d6, e6, f6) but loses four
discs on the b1-h7 diagonal (c2, d3, e4, f5). Further, Black gains g5, but loses
h4. Thus, after Black h6/White h7 Black has no gain and finishes with 32
discs.
Exercise 13-2 Black begins with 27 discs. If Black plays a8, White responds
with b8, and Black gains six discs (a8, c6, d5, e4, f3, g2) for a total of 33. If
Black plays b8, White responds a8. Black gains nine discs (b3, b4, b5, b6, c7,
d6, e5, f4, g3) but loses four discs (a5, a6, a7, g8) for a net gain of five discs.
Exercise 13-3 Black should play d8 and ends with 37 discs. After Black plays
d8, White gets swindled because he does not have access to e8, so Black
gets this move as well. When there are two empty squares at the end of the
game, and one of the moves swindles the opponent, it is always better to
make this move.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Exercise 13-4 Parity suggests that White should play to the odd region (b6).
However, in this case, b2 is the correct move, allowing White to finish with 33
discs. If White plays b6 first, it flips the disc on d4. After Black takes a1, White’s
move to b2 does not flip e5 because his disc on d4 “gets in the way”. Starting
with b2 is therefore one disc better than b6.
Exercise 13-5 White should play a1. After Black passes, White plays b2, and
Black ends the game with b1. Counting this sequence, White begins with 20
discs, and gains seven discs on the left edge after playing a1 for a subtotal of
27. Following a1, White must consider both b1 and b2. Starting with the move
that is easier to count, b1 gains five discs on the top edge and White will finish
with 27+5=32 discs. After a1, if White plays b2, it gains eight discs (c2, d2, e2,
f2, c3, d4, e5, f6) for a subtotal of 27+8=35, but after Black plays b1, White
loses the disc on b5, so he ends with 34 discs.
Exercise 13-6 The perfect play sequence is White b8, Black a8, White a7.
Counting this sequence, White starts with 30 discs. After White b8, Black a8,
White has gained five discs (c7, d6, e5, f4, g3) and lost five discs (c8, d8, e8,
f8, c6). One the final move a7, White gains three discs (a7, a6, b7) for a total
of 33 discs. If White begins with a7 or a8, the game ends in a draw.

Chapter 15
Puzzle 1 Black’s first move is a6. Unless White responds by going to a7,
Black can take the corner at a1 for his second move. If White does respond
with a7, it will turn over the disc at g7, allowing Black to take h8 corner.
Puzzle 2 White’s first move is b6, turning over ten discs. This leaves Black
with only three options (b7, g2, and h7) all of which allow White to take a
corner on his next move.
Puzzle 3 Black’s first move should be to b2. This allows White only two options
(a2 and b7), both of which give Black access to a corner on his next move.
Puzzle 4 White plays to g1, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 5 White plays to h4, simultaneously attacking two corners (a1 and h8).
Black has no way to defend this double attack.
Puzzle 6 Black plays to a5, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 7 White plays to d1, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 8 Black plays to g2, leaving White with no safe moves. If White plays
to b2, it flips the disc on g2, giving Black access to h1.

Answers to exercises
Puzzle 9 Black plays to a6, leaving White with only two options (h2 or e7). If
White chooses h2, Black captures h1. If White chooses e7, Black plays b7,
ending the game.
Puzzle 10 White plays to e8, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 11 Black plays to g1, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 12 Black plays to g2, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 13 Black plays to a3, attacking the h8 corner. If White responds with
b2, this flips the disc on b7, giving Black access to a8.
Puzzle 14 White begins by playing h5. If Black responds with g3 or h4, White
plays h7, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 15 White’s first move is h5. If Black plays to h3, White plays to f7,
leaving Black with no safe moves. If Black plays g2, White plays e1, gaining
access to h1. If Black plays any other move, White plays h3, gaining access to
Puzzle 16 Black should play to g7. White’s only safe move is f7, to which
Black responds f8, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 17 White goes to e1, attacking the h1 corner. Black must defend with
d1, after which White plays g2, grabbing the diagonal and leaving Black with
no safe moves.
Puzzle 18 White goes to d1, attacking the h1 corner. Black must defend with
c1, after which White plays h7, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 19 Black plays to h2, which does not give White access to h3. If White
replies with e2 or f2, Black plays h3, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 20 Black goes to g2, leaving h1 as White’s only response. Black then
plays f8, leaving d8 as White’s only response, which gives Black access to a8.
Puzzle 21 Black plays to g8. No matter how White responds, Black follows
with e8 and can play a8 on his third move.
Puzzle 22 Black’s first move should be to g3. This offers White for possible
replies (a2, b2, g2, and h2). If White chooses a2, Black attacks corner a1 by
playing at a5. If White chooses b2, Black attacks a1 by playing d8. If White
chooses g2 or h2, Black can attack corner h1 by playing h3.
Puzzle 23 White should play a3. If Black responds a2, White plays b2, poisoning
Black’s move to f2 and leaving Black with no safe moves. If Black does not
respond a2, White plays a6 and captures the a8 corner on his third move.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 24 White goes to b8, attacking corner h8. If Black defends by going to
a8, White counters with a3, thereby gaining access to corner a1. If instead
Black defends by going to h8, White responds with h7, thereby gaining access
to corner h1.
Puzzle 25 White should play a5. If Black responds a7, White counters with
h6. If Black instead plays a7, White counters with h6. In either case Black is
left with no safe moves.
Puzzle 26 White plays to h5. If Black replies with g8, White plays to h7, leaving
Black with no safe moves. If Black instead tries h3, White counters with c8,
gaining access to corner a8.
Puzzle 27 Black should play d2. If White responds with d1 or e1, Black counters
with b8; if White instead plays c2, Black counters with c8. In either case,
White will have no safe moves.
Puzzle 28 Black goes to f6. White’s only safe response is g2. Black then
moves to d6, gaining access to corner h1.
Puzzle 29 White should play e3. Black’s only safe response is b3. White then
moves to a3, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 30 White should play g7. If Black replies c2, White plays b2, leaving
Black with no safe moves. If Black instead plays a2, White wedges at a5,
gaining access to a1.
Puzzle 31 Black’s first move should be to g7. White’s only safe moves are g6
and g8. In either case Black continues with f8, gaining access to a corner on
his next move.
Puzzle 32 Black goes to g6. If White chooses h5, Black replies with h7. If
instead White chooses h7, Black replies a4. In either case, White has no safe
moves.
Puzzle 33 Black should play d8. If White chooses a2, Black replies f8. If White
instead chooses b8 or f8, Black replies g8. In each case, White is left with no
safe moves.
Puzzle 34 White goes to d1. Whatever Black’s response, White continues
with b2, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 35 Black plays to h6. If White responds with g7 or h7, Black moves to
h4, gaining access to corner h8.
Puzzle 36 White’s first move should be to h5. Black’s only safe move is h4.
White then moves to g7, leaving Black with no safe moves.

Answers to exercises
Puzzle 37 Black goes to b7. White’s only safe response is f2, after which
Black plays g2, offering White no safe moves.
Puzzle 38 White should play a5. Black must reply with a1, after which White
fills in at b2, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 39 Black goes to d1, attacking the h8 corner. White must respond g1.
Black then moves to g2, leaving White with no safe response.
Puzzle 40 White should play a4, forcing Black to reply with a3. White then
moves to d1, attacking the h1 corner. Black’s only defense is c1, but this move
flips the disc on b2, giving White access to corner a1.
Puzzle 41 White goes to a4, forcing Black to reply with a3. White then moves
to h2, leaving Black with no safe response.
Puzzle 42 White should play b8. No matter where Black responds, White
continues with e8, leaving Black with no safe response.
Puzzle 43 Black goes to g7. Whatever White’s response, Black plays a6,
attacking the a1 corner. If White defends with a7, it flips the disc on b7, giving
Black access to a8.
Puzzle 44 White moves to d1. Black’s only safe response is c1. White then
moves to f8, leaving Black with access only to a2, which gives White the a1
corner.
Puzzle 45 White’s first move should be f8, forcing Black to reply e8. White
then moves to a2, forcing Black to play g8, offering White the h8 corner.
Puzzle 46 White goes to g4. Whatever Black replies, White moves to g2,
leaving Black with no safe response.
Puzzle 47 Black’s first move should be to b7. White’s only safe response is
a8. Black then plays g3; White’s only move is g2, giving Black the h1 corner.
Puzzle 48 Black goes to g2. This offers White three safe responses: c2, h1,
and h2. If White chooses c2 or h2, Black moves to b7, leaving White with no
safe response. If White chooses h1, Black wedges at h2 and takes corner h8
on his next turn.
Puzzle 49 Black plays b8, leaving White with safe responses at c8 and d8.
Whichever White chooses, Black plays the other half of the pair, leaving White
with no safe moves.
Puzzle 50 White should play a2. If Black chooses a1, White wedges at e1,
gaining access to h1. If Black instead chooses h7, then White responds with
a6, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 51 White goes to c7. If Black responds c8, White plays b2. If instead
Black responds b6, White plays b7. In either case Black is left with no safe
response. If Black responds b8, White wedges at c8, gaining access to a
corner on his third move.
Puzzle 52 Black should play a4. If White chooses b7, then Black replies with
c2, breaking the diagonal. If instead White chooses h7, Black replies g2, leaving
White with no safe response.
Puzzle 53 White should play g7. If Black replies b8, White employs a Stoner
trap by playing f8. If Black instead replies c2, White plays b2, leaving Black
with no safe moves.
Puzzle 54 Black’s first move should be to a2, forcing White to respond a1.
Black then launches a Stoner trap by playing h3.
Puzzle 55 Black should play a7, forcing White to respond with a8. Black can
then wedge at g1 and take a1 on his next turn.
Puzzle 56 Black goes to c1, forcing White to respond with g1. Black then
moves to h5, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 57 White should play h7. If Black responds with h6, White moves to
d1, leaving Black with no safe moves. If Black does not respond with h6,
White moves there himself, gaining access to h1 on his next turn.
Puzzle 58 Black goes to g5, leaving White with five safe moves (b1, f6, f7, g6,
and h6). No matter which of these moves White chooses, Black responds
with e1, guaranteeing himself corner a8 or h1 on his next turn.
Puzzle 59 Black should play b7, leaving a8 as White’s only safe response.
Black then wedges at b8, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 60 Black should play b2. If White responds d8, Black should then
launch a Stoner trap by playing a6. If White does not respond with d8, then
Black plays c8, guaranteeing capture of corner a8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 61 White goes to c1. Black’s only safe move is d8. White then goes to
c8, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 62 White should play h4. No matter how Black responds, White initiates
a Stoner trap with c1.
Puzzle 63 White goes to d8. This leaves Black with safe moves at b1 and d1.
Regardless of which move Black chooses, White plays b7, leaving Black with
no safe moves.

Answers to exercises
Puzzle 64 White’s first move should be b7, threatening a Stoner trap by playing
c8. Black must reply with b3 to prevent the Stoner. White then plays to b4,
leaving Black with no safe response.
Puzzle 65 White goes to a2, leaving a1 as Black’s only safe response. White
then plays to b2, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 66 Black should play a2. If White responds c7, Black plays h7, leaving
White with no safe moves. If White responds d8, Black wedges at e8 and can
take corner h8 on his next turn. If White responds e8 or h1, Black plays c6 and
can take corner a8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 67 White goes to h4. If Black responds h8, White should play at b7,
leaving Black with no safe moves. If Black instead responds g2 then White
can cut the diagonal with d1.
Puzzle 68 White should play to b7. If Black responds a2, White should spring
a Stoner trap with a move to a3. Likewise, White can counter a Black response
of g8 by playing f8. If Black’s initial response is f8, White should reply with g8,
leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 69 Black goes to b2. If White responds a2 or h2, Black should continue
with g2, leaving White with no safe moves. If instead White responds g1, then
Black should continue with h6, again leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 70 Black should play at e1, threatening corner a1. If White blocks by
moving to f1, Black should break the a8-h1 diagonal with g8 and take corner
h1 on his next turn. If White Blacks by moving to a1 himself, Black can wedge
at a2 and take corner a8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 71 Black should play g7. No matter where White responds, Black
should next play at a6, threatening corner a1. White must play at a7, which
flips the disc at g7, offering Black corner h8.
Puzzle 72 Black goes to d1. White must play c1, after which Black continues
with a4, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 73 Black should play c8, forcing White to respond with b8. Black then
attacks corner h1 by playing d1. If White tries to defend with c1, it flips the disc
on b7 and offers Black the a8 corner.
Puzzle 74 Black plays d8, leaving c8 as White’s only safe response. Black
should then play a2, leaving White with no safe moves.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Puzzle 75 Black should play h5. This leaves White with two safe responses:
h4 and h6. Black should respond h3 or h7, respectively, leaving White with no
safe moves.
Puzzle 76 Black should move to b7. If White chooses b3, Black play b2, leaving
White with no safe response. If White instead chooses h8, Black wedges at
g8 and takes corner a8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 77 White goes to g7, leaving h8 as Black’s only safe move. White then
continues with c2, offering Black no safe response.
Puzzle 78 White should play to b2. If Black chooses a1, White wedges at b1
and takes corner h1 on his next move. If Black instead chooses b1, White
plays b8, leaving Black with no safe response.
Puzzle 79 White goes to a2, leaving e2 as Black’s only safe response. White
continues with f2, leaving Black with no safe moves.
Puzzle 80 Black should play g2. White’s only safe move is h7, after which
Black launches a Stoner trap by playing h3.
Puzzle 81 Black plays a2, and no matter where White responds, Black follows
with a4. This guarantees capture of corner a8 on his third move.
Puzzle 82 White should play b4, attacking corner h8. If Black responds b2,
White breaks the diagonal with b3. If Black instead responds b3, White breaks
the diagonal with g1.
Puzzle 83 White goes to b2. If Black responds d1, White initiates a Stoner
trap with c1. Otherwise, White plays d1 himself, again setting up a Stoner
trap.
Puzzle 84 Black moves to c2. If White responds with g1, then Black plays g7
and White has no safe response. If White responds b2, Black cuts the diagonal
with b8 and takes a1 on his next turn.
Puzzle 85 Black plays g5. If White responds with a4, Black wedges at a3 and
takes corner a1 on his next turn. If White responds h6, Black wedges at h5
and takes corner h8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 86 Black should play b2. White’s only safe move is a8, after which
Black plays a7, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 87 Black moves to g7, leaving b5 as White’s only safe response. Black
then moves to b4, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 88 Black plays h7. White’s only safe move is c7, after which Black
plays b2, leaving White with no safe response.
Answers to exercises
Puzzle 89 Black should play h3, leaving b3 as White’s only safe response.
Black then plays b7, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 90 Black moves to g2. If White responds with d8, Black plays h4 and
White has no safe moves. If White instead plays g7, Black breaks the diagonal
with h4 and takes h8 on his next turn.
Puzzle 91 Black plays g7. If White chooses f6, Black plays h6, leaving White
with no safe moves. If White instead chooses h6 or h7, Black plays b7, again
leaving White with no safe moves. If White chooses g2, Black cuts the diagonal
with g4 and takes h1 on his next turn.
Puzzle 92 Black should play g7. If White responds with g8, Black can play g5
or g6, leaving White with no safe moves. If White responds with g5 Black
plays g6, or if White responds g6 Black plays g5; in each case White has no
safe moves.
Puzzle 93 Black should play e7. White’s only safe response is f8. Black then
plays g7, leaving White with no safe moves.
Puzzle 94 White goes to d3. If Black chooses f1, then White plays e1, winning
the h1 corner. If Black instead choose e1, White wedges at f1, again winning
the h1 corner.
Puzzle 95 White should play d7. Black’s only move is d5, after which White
plays f3, winning the h1 corner.
Puzzle 96 White goes to h7, and no matter where Black responds, continues
with h3, winning the h1 corner.
Puzzle 97 White should play f3. Black must defend with c6. White then plays
f2, and Black can not flip the disc on f3.
Puzzle 98 Black should begin with f8, and White must defend at e8. Black
then plays b7. No matter how White responds, Black follows with a Stoner
attack at c8, guaranteeing a corner on his fourth move.
Puzzle 99 Black goes to b7, and White passes. Black then goes to a2. White’s
only move is to b2, flipping the disc on b7. Black’s third move is to a8, White
passes, and Black takes h8 on his fourth move.

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Glossary
A-square: Any edge square which is separated from the nearest corner by one other
edge square (see Diagram 1-2).
Anchor: One or more edge pieces which cannot easily be eliminated by the opposition, offering protection against a wipe-out.
B-square: Any edge square which is separated from the nearest corner by two other
edge squares (see Diagram 1-2).
Balanced edge: An edge occupied by six adjacent discs of the same color, both corners being vacant.
Blackline: The diagonal running from h1 to a8.
Break a diagonal: Establish a disc on a diagonal controlled by the opponent.
C-square: Any edge square which is adjacent to a corner (see Diagram 1-2).
Control the center: Having discs bunched in the center of the board while the
opponent’s discs are on the outside.
Diagonal control: Having a line of several discs of the same color on a diagonal line
while the opponent has no discs on the same line.
Even number theory: When there is a region with an even number of empty squares,
it is usually better to have your opponent initiate play in the region.
Extract: Flip an interior disc that was valuable for the opponent.
Feeding the opponent: Intentionally giving the opponent options in a region.
Forced move: A move on which a player has only one legal play.
Free move: A move available to only one player which can be deferred until later in
the game and which, when taken, does not create any safe responses for the opponent.
Frontier disc: A disc which borders one or more empty squares.
Gain a tempo: To achieve an advantage of timing by deriving one more viable move
than the opposition from play within a limited area of the board and thereby in effect
transferring to the opposition the burden of initiating play elsewhere.
Hyper even-number theory: A player can force his opponent to initiate play in an
even-numbered region if the player does not have access to any of the squares in the
region.
Interior disc: A disc which is completely surrounded by other discs.
Interior sweep: A strategy by which one side creates a large number of stable interior discs, usually sacrificing edge discs in the process.
Internal disc: Same as interior disc.
Loud move: A move which creates many new frontier discs.

Glossary
Main diagonal: One of the two eight-square diagonals running between two corners
(see Diagram 6-16).
Pair: Two empty squares such that if a player moves to one of the squares, his opponent will want to play in the other.
Parity: The ability to get the last move in every or almost every region.
Poison disc: A disc which turns what would otherwise be a quiet move into a loud
move.
Poisoned move: A potentially quiet move which is a loud move because of a poison
disc.
Quiet move: A move which does not create many new frontier discs.
Run out of moves: A position in which the player to move has no safe moves available.
Safe move: A move which does not concede a corner.
Semi-forced move: A move which is forced not by the rules of the game but rather by
tactical considerations.
Stable disc: A disc which cannot be flipped no matter what moves are made throughout the rest of the game.
Stoner trap: A sequence of moves forcing the capture of a corner by first controlling
a main diagonal with an X-square move, then attacking a corner so that if the opponent defends the corner, he flips the X-square. See Diagram 9-25.
Swindle: A situation where one player gets both moves in a pair because, following
the first move into the pair, the opponent does not have a legal move to the other
square in the pair.
Tesuji: A good move or sequence of moves that can be used in certain frequentlyoccurring positions.
Unbalanced edge: An edge occupied by five adjacent discs of the same color, one Csquare and both corners being vacant.
Wall: A connected group of frontier discs of the same color.
Wedge: A disc or line of several discs of the same color on an edge which is abutted
on both sides by opposition discs, or playing a move which creates a wedge.
Whiteline: The diagonal running from a1 to h8.
Wing: An unbalanced edge.
Wipe-out: A game which ends with all the discs on the board the same color.
X-square: Any edge square which is diagonally adjacent to a corner (see Diagram 12).

Othello: A Minute to Learn...A Lifetime to Master
Othello’: Brief & Basic

An introduction to strategy & tact
for the game of Othello

Revised Edition




(et Je (Seer

oOo aA mh Oh F&F WH BR

ClecCe@ececec-

QO@OOCO

O IO
e OO
eee0



Ted Landat

Updated Second Printin:

First printing: November 1987
Second printing: February 1990

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy-
Printed in the United States of America.

Othello® is Milton Bradley Co.'s registered trademark for its strategy disc game and

Naomi and Brian,
who stood by me while I stood by the computer.
PREFACE

The United States Othello Association (USOA) was created for the advancement of
the game of Othello in the United States. It was begun in 1978 by a group of U.S. Othello
players who had gathered to attend the World Othello Championship (held in New York
City that year). At the time, the Japanese dominated the World Championships (they still
do!) and it was clear to all who attended that the Japanese knew something about Othello
that remained largely a mystery to everyone else. Jonathan Cerf, George Sullivan and the
rest of the original USOA members set out to discover what that was. They were quite suc-
cessful: Jonathan went on to become the 1980 World Champion, the first non-Japanese
player to do so.

Immediately after its inception, the USOA began the sponsorship of tournaments, es-
pecially the annual U.S. National Championship (the winner of which competes in the
World Championship). The USOA (largely through the efforts of Jonathan and George)
also began publication of Othello Quarterly (OQ) as a means of disseminating informa-
tion about Othello. At the present time, the USOA continues to serve the Othello commu-
nity, maintaining a world wide membership of several hundred players.

I was not one of the original members. However, I had been playing Othello for sever-
al years when I first became aware of and joined the USOA in 1980. By studying articles
in OQ, I set about to change what I discovered to be my largely wrong notions about
Othello strategy. Eventually, I felt I had learned enough to attempt writing an article my-
self. It appeared in the Winter 1980/81 issue of OQ. Over the next several years, I contrib-
uted more than a dozen articles to OQ. Along the way, I also became one of the USOA's
top-rated tournament players.

In 1984, I assumed the Editorship of OQ. That same year, I had the good fortune to
win the U.S. National Championship. I went on to the World Championship, where I
finished third. With the confidence from my tournament victories and the resources availa-
ble to me as Editor of OQ, I decided that now was an appropriate time to attempt a project
of long-standing interest: to write an introductory handbook on Othello strategy and tac-
tics.

It was clearly something that the USOA needed. It was becoming increasingly diffi-
cult (and unrealistic to expect of new members) to learn the fundamental principles of
Othello strategy by sorting through the ever increasing collection of largely unrelated arti-
cles appearing in the back issues of OQ. A concise, synthesized, easily accessible single
resource was the obvious alternative: a Beginner's Handbook, as it came to be called.
Another potential value of this project would be to serve as an antidote for all the misinfor-
mation about Othello that has been printed in various books over the years. For example, a
recent book describing popular "indoor games" had the following to say about Othello: "It
is not easy to see ahead accurately more than a move or two..." This is patently false, as the
information presented in this book will demonstrate.

With all this in mind, I began to work on the Beginner's Handbook project. The result
was the original version of "Othello: Brief & Basic," which appeared (starting in Spring
of 1985) as a series of three articles published in separate issues of OQ over the course of a
year. The issues containing these articles were well received and subsequently became rec-
ommended reading for all new USOA members. There seemed to be sufficient mterest to
justify revising Brief & Basic and combining the three parts into one integrated book.
Thus the revised edition of Othello: Brief & Basic was born.

For this revised edition, I added a table of contents and an index so as to make it easier
to locate particular topics. I also added an appendix containing 11 game transcripts for fur-
ther study and analysis. On the other hand, I chose to eliminate the footnotes of the original
version — most of them references to relevant articles from previous issues of OQ — rather
than have them interrupt the flow of the text. As an alternative, I have included a separate
reference section that contains a listing of almost all of the cited articles.

Othello: Brief & Basic Vv
This is in no way meant to diminish the debt I owe to my fellow authors of OQ arti-
cles. Thus, I again wish to thank George Sullivan, Jonathan Cerf, Amold Kling and the
others without whose writing and insights this Handbook would have taken much longer to
complete (if it ever would have been completed at all). In a more general way, this
Handbook has also benefited from the work of still more people. In particular, I want to ex-
press my gratitude to Brian Rose, David Shaman and the rest of the USOA's top tourna-
ment players (together with our Othello colleagues in other countries). It has been their
skill and expertise that has "pushed the envelope" of what we know about Othello today.
My thanks similarly go to Clarence Hewlett, Dan & Kathe Spracklen, Charlie Heath, Peter
Frey and the other computer programmers whose Othello programs have served as a much
needed source of analytical information, especially in the area of endgame play. As a result
of the efforts of all these individuals, the level of play of tournament Othello in this coun-
try (as well as in the rest of the world!) has improved exponentially over the last 10 years.

Finally, some comments and advice to readers who are approaching Brief & Basic for
the first time. It has been commented that this Handbook is neither as brief nor as basic as
the title would imply. As to its brevity, I can only say that it is considerably shorter than the
more "complete" Handbook that I first envisioned. To meet the time and space constraints
of appearing within the pages of OQ, it necessitated that I leave much material out. Rather
than committing myself to a major expansion for this revision, I have maintained this ap-
proach. At times this places an extra burden on the reader. For example, one diagram often
serves to illustrate several techniques, where clearly two or three would have made under-
standing the techniques easier. Similarly, there are several explanations of one or two sen-
tences where one or two paragraphs might have helped clarify the matter more. I apologize
for this. My best advice to compensate for these possible weaknesses is - as stated in the
Handbook - to lay out all the diagrammed positions on a board as you read and play out the
moves under discussion.

Another consequence of this emphasis on brevity is that many important ideas are
only mentioned in passing or omitted altogether. Sometimes I comment that a fuller under-
standing would require more space than I could give it. In the worst cases, I become quasi-
mystical and refer to the necessity of practice and experience as a pre-condition for under-
standing. If the reader finds these explanations unsatisfactory, I again apologize. However,
in a few cases (new to this revision), I discuss some of these additional topics in special
sections labelled as "digressions" or "notes."

As to how "basic" the Handbook is: It is certainly basic in the sense that it assumes no
prior knowledge of Othello (other than perhaps a vague idea of the rules of the game).
Even a novice player should be able to follow and implement all of the advice given in this
Handbook. On the other hand, the Handbook does contain a lot of material. The matters
discussed range from the novice level to the expert level. This is not a breezy tutorial than
can be skimmed in a couple of hours. It's probably best if it's studied a few pages at a time,
and always with a board 1n front of you.

The material in Points #1 - #8 should be considered essential for all novice Othello
players to know. Mastering the information in Points #9 - #16 (particularly the concept of
tempo) should result in still a second important leap forward in playing ability. The materi-
al in the remaining points, while representing the greatest technical challenge, is necessary
for anyone hoping to move toward expert level of play.

I have very much enjoyed writing this Handbook. I hope that Othello players, from
novice to expert, will enjoy reading it and will benefit from doing so.

Ted Landau
September 1987

vi Othello: Brief & Basic
Note added for second printing:

I resigned as Editor of OQ in 1986 and shortly thereafter stopped competing in tour-
naments. I worked on Brief & Basic until its publication in late 1987. Since then, I have
remained quietly active in the Othello community. I have been gratified with the positive
response to Brief & Basic. Due to its continued popularity, a second printing has become
necessary. I have taken this opportunity to try(!) to correct all the numerous typographical
errors that had crept into the previous printing. I have also made minor changes to the text
in several places, attempting (yet again!) to improve the clarity of the discussion. Lastly, a
few items have been updated to reflect the events and trends of the past few years.

The world of Othello continues to evolve. The best players today are clearly superior
to their counterparts of just a few years ago. The Japanese remain the dominant force in in-
ternational competition, and the U.S. similarly remains near the top. However, the overall
level of international competition has improved tremendously — with an increasing number
of excellent players emerging from European countries. The game of Othello can only
benefit from these trends. I hope they continue. My hope for Brief & Basic remains un-
changed: that Othello players, wherever they live and from novice to expert, will enjoy
reading this Handbook and will benefit from doing so.

Ted Landau
January 1990

Othello: Brief & Basic vii
INTRODUCTION

Origins. The origins of the game of Othello remain uncertain, though its similarity to
ancient Oriental games such as Go suggests that Othello may have similar roots. Othello's
modem form emerged in England, in the late 1800's, when Lewis Waterman and John
Mollett each separately claimed to have invented the game of Reversi. Though they each
denounced the other as a fraud, they both probably derived their ideas from related pre-
existing games. Reversi remained popular over the next 20 years and then seemed to fade
from view. It resurfaced in Japan, in the early 1970's, when Goro Hasegawa refined the
rules of Reversi, making two significant changes (see below), and called the game Othello.
Othello became very popular during the 1970's, with an annual World Championship be-
gun in 1977 and National Championships held in many countries, including the United
States. The increase in interest in microcomputers in recent years has also contributed to a
resurgence of mterest in Othello/Reversi. This is because the nature of Othello (few rules,
symmetrical board, one type of piece) lends itself to writing computer programs that can
"play" the game. Dozens of programs, widely varying in quality, now exist that play
Othello. Computer Othello tournaments are held periodically throughout the world.

Equipment. Othello is played on a 8 x 8 ao bcd ie f qgih
board of 64 squares, similar to a chess board.
The game pieces are sixty-four discs, black on ' C|A(BIBIA
one side and white on the other. 21Clk ¥ IC
Object. The object of Othello is to end the 2] A x A
game with the majority of discs on the board
Rules. A brief summary of the rules follows. 5|B eo O al B
The rule most likely to present difficulty fora 6 | A es A
novice is the one defining a legal move (#4).
This rule is much easier to understand from ex- 71C]X KIC
amples (many of which follow) than to verball
onnlains J % 8 C\A|BIB/A/C
Diagram 1

1. A game always begins with four discs placed
as shown in Diagram 1. (This differs from
the rules of Reversi, which allows for any position of the four central discs).

2. One player is assigned Black and always places his discs with the Black side up. The
other player is White, and conversely places his discs with the White side up.

3. Black always goes first with Black and White alternating turns thereafter.

4. A legal move is defined as follows: a new disc is placed on a vacant square. This vacant
square must be adjacent to at least one square already occupied by a disc of the oppo-
nent's color. This new disc must also be placed so that in at least one direction (vertical-
ly, horizontally, or diagonally) the newly-placed disc, together with a disc of the
player's color already on the board, brackets (or "outflanks") one or more discs of the
opponent's color. The bracketed disc(s) are turned over (or "flipped") to become the
same color as the newly placed disc. If a newly-placed disc outflanks opponent's discs
in several directions at once, all such discs are flipped. For example, all possible legal
moves for Black's first turn are indicated with asterisks in Diagram 1 -- each choice
would result in the flipping of one or the other of the two white disks. For an example of
a move that flips more than one disc, turn to Diagram 4 for a moment. Here, a White
move to d7 would flip 4 discs: d4, d5, and d6 vertically and e6 diagonally.

5. A player with no legal moves must "pass." For every turn in which a player must pass,
his opponent continues to take turns, taking discs from the other player's "tray" as nec-
essary. Thus, (unlike Reversi) a player cannot "run out" of discs.

6. A player may not pass if he has a legal move available.

Othello: Brief & Basic 1
7. If neither player has a legal move, the game ends even if there are still vacant squares on
the board. Most often, the game ends when all 64 squares are filled.

8. Once placed on the board, a disc is never moved again, though it may be flipped repeat-
edly over the course of the game. A disc that currently has its white side facing up 1s
called a white disc and vice versa.

Notation & Terminology. In the discussions that follow, the best way to understand
the diagrams is to use a board and discs, laying out and examining the positions discussed
as you go. Diagram | introduces the basics of Othello notation, as used in the diagrams.
Squares are typically referred to by the letter and number that corresponds to the square, as
indicated along the borders of each diagram. Thus, the second square in the first row is
called the b1 square. Some squares have additional names, as shown in Diagram 1. Thus,
the b1 square 1s also referred to as a C-square. In the case of double diagrams (two grids
with an arrow between): the upper grid shows (1) the board configuration prior to the
move or sequence of moves under discussion (the unnumbered discs) and (2) the move or
sequence of moves under discussion (the numbered discs); the lower grid shows the board
configuration after the move or sequence of moves under discussion has been made. The
numbered discs indicate that you should place discs on the board in the numerical se-
quence shown, flipping the appropriate discs as you do so.

The game of Othello is divided into three phases. The approximate dividing lines are:
Opening: first 20 moves; Midgame: middle 20 moves; Endgame: last 20 moves. Other
important terms will be given in boldface when first mentioned in the sections to follow.

STRATEGY & TACTICS: 21 POINTS

Othello is a game of skill. Luck rarely, if ever, affects the outcome of a game. The
player who can better apply the principles discussed in this handbook will consistently win
against the less well-informed player. Many players remain largely unaware of these prin-
ciples, perhaps because the correct strategy is often subtle and counter-intuitive and there-
fore difficult to discover without assistance. These 21 points attempt to provide this assis-
tance.

The right move. The irony of Othello (as well as many other abstract strategy
games) is that even though the entire board and all the pieces are in full view at all times,
the best move is often far from obvious. Deciding upon the "night" move can be analogous
to hunting for buried treasure: you need to know (1) what it is you are looking for and (2)
how to go about finding it. These themes wind their way through every point in this book.
For example, Points #4, #5 & #9 focus on the general characteristics of a good move and
the importance of trying to visual the future consequences of a move. Specific suggestions
as to how to recognize good moves in common midgame positions are made in Point #13
and again in #16. The discussions of openings, endgames, and edge play offer other situa-
tion specific recommendations. Point #21 finally deals with the difficult issue of how to
find the best move when (as often happens in real games) several of the "rules" discussed
here lead to conflicting or unclear advice. This book will not supply you with all the an-
swers. But it will give you a good head start.

1. Get More Stable Discs, Not Just More Discs

The object of Othello is to end the game with more discs than your opponent. This
ultimate goal is frequently translated, by many beginning players, into an immediate
goal throughout the game. That is, on each turn, a player will (with few exceptions) take
the move that flips the maximum number of discs. This has been clearly shown to be an
inferior strategy. Actually, disc count is often irrelevant to who is ahead in a game. This
point can not be stated too strongly. In fact, players who consistently flip large numbers
of discs early in the game are among the easiest opponents for experts to defeat! An ex-

2 Othello: Brief & Basic
ample is in Diagram 2. Here, Black has only
one disc on the board, with only four moves
leftin the game. Butif you play the game out, ,
you will find that Black gets all the remain-
ing moves and wins the game 40-24. Clearly,
simply having a lot of discs, even at such a
late point in the game, is not enough to assure
victory. Even games between experts may
end with this sort of turn-around in the last
few moves (though usually not as dramatic as
in this example). The reason this can happen
is that White's disc majority was fragile,
since many of his discs were vulnerable to
being flipped by Black. The point therefore is

not simply to acquire discs, but acquire discs eeeee
that cannot be flipped for the rest of the IAI

game, no matter how the game develops. ' ;

Such discs are called stable discs. Unfortu- Diagram 2: Black to move
nately, as we will see, stable discs usually
cannot be acquired in any great number until

the endgame. Therefore, the strategy for the
majority of the game focuses on factors other 14
than the relative disc counts of the two
players. These are discussed in the next sev-
eral points.

d f h

cece
Sseee

QOOQOOO
QOOCOOOC!-

oO aS om Of & Wh

2. Not All Squares Were Created
Equal

A crucial idea that beginning players in-
evitably realize is the importance of the 4
corner squares on the board. It was not coin-
cidental that the 4 empty squares in Diagram
2 were all corner squares. A corner is im-
portant because it can never be flipped. That
is, itis a stable disc. Similarly, possession of Diagram 3: Black to move
discs adjacent to a commer square (once the
corer has been occupied) often means that
the adjacent discs are stable as well. Thus in
Diagram 3, when Black takes the h8 comer,
all the discs in the g and h columns andinthe  ,
seventh and eighth rows, suddenly become
stable discs for Black. Black is well on the
way to winning the game. In fact, possession
of a comer is so critical in the beginning of
the game, that getting one almost always as-
sures victory. Similarly, since the comers
and the edge squares together add up to 28
squares, it is almost impossible to win with-
out occupying at least some of these squares.

An implied corollary to the above princi-
ples is that squares adjacent to corners are ex-
tremely risky to occupy, at least until the cor-
ner itself has been occupied. This is because
these squares can become "stepping stones" ' . '
for your opponent to take the corner. This is Diagram 4: White to move

Oo som th f& WwW hi

, Je
, Je

Oo a om Ch & WwW hi

Othello: Brief & Basic 3
oOo -— mm oh & iW KI

oOo om  & iW hh

especially true of the X-squares. Taking an X-square early in the game, usually guaran-
tees that the other player will get the adjacent comer. Such a situation is seen in Dia-
gram 4. Itis White's turn, but no matter where White goes, Black will be able to flip the
disc on the X-square (g7) and take the h8 corner on his next move. Very simply, White
should never have gone to the g7 square at this stage of the game. There are similar
problems with C-squares (see Point #6), though they do not guarantee the opponent's
access to the corner nearly as often as X-squares do.

An incorrect, though commonly assumed, implication of the above discussion is that
all squares on the board can be rated as to their absolute value. In this approach the cor-
ners are typically rated as the most valuable, the A and B edge squares as valuable (but
less so than corners), the non-edge squares (particularly those adjacent to the edge) as
still less valuable, and the C- and X-squares as most risky. By this theory, the best move
on each turn usually will be the move that occupies the highest rated square to which
the player has a legal move. Unfortunately, a player adopting this strategy will almost
always be defeated by a player using the winning strategies to be discussed in the next
sections.

[Note: Corners often diminish in value near the end of the game, and corner sacrific-
es become quite common among expert players. In such situations, possession of only
one corner may be sufficient to win the

a_b dae fog ih game. Similarly, occupation of C-squares

ning the game. Examples of these situations

() and even X-squares may be crucial to win-

will be discussed extensively in still later

sections. ]

In summary, the incorrect strategies
place an unwarranted value on flipping large
numbers of discs even though they are not
stable and on possessing the A and B edge

squares. Ironically, the correct strategy typi-
cally involves flipping a minimum number

of discs and often avoiding the non-corner
edge squares, at least until later in the game.

These counter-intuitive ideas, though they

may be difficult for the beginning Othello

player to appreciate, are the key to a winning
Othello strategy! Let's look at these ideas in
more detail:

g_ih 3. Control of the Game: Mobility
Optimization and Dynamic
Square Evaluation

Once understood, the logic of the correct
strategy to winning Othello seems quite
straightforward. Your hope is to get your
opponent to make a poor move that will al-
low you to win the game (e.g. get early ac-
cess to a corner etc.). Obviously, your oppo-
nent, especially if he is a skilled player, is


not likely to make such a move willingly.

C) Your goal, therefore is to force him to make

a poor move. How can this be accom-

eeeoo00 ® plished? Quite simply, if your opponent has

only very few (ideally just one or two) legal
moves, and they are poor moves, then your
opponent will be required (by the rules of

Diagram 6: Black to move

Othello: Brief & Basic
the game) to make a poor move. In the ex-
treme case, where your opponent has only
one move, he is said to have a forced move. ,
An example is given in Diagram 5. Here,
Black wisely chooses to go to e8. The wis-
dom of Black's move quickly becomes evi-
dent: White now has only one move, to b2,
which will allow Black to get the al corner
and inevitably win the game. A slightly
more subtle example of the same principle is
in Diagram 6. Here, if Black moves to g6(!),
White is again forced to the b2 X-square.
Note that any other move for Black (e.g. f6,
g5) opens up new moves for White, thus
eliminating the forced move to b2.

In more general terms, your goal is move
limitation, or limiting the number of moves
(often referred to as options) that your oppo-
nent has. At the same time you wish to maxi-
mize your own options. Overall, this is re-
ferred to as mobility optimization. This is a ob ¢ de f g h

a mee sese
you have gained control of the game. if you 2 CUCes
can continue to maintain such control, you 3| WOOO
of the power of this approach is demonstrat- 4 “eeee

Sees .


OCee@ —-
OOOO”:

OOOO
QOCOO®

oO aS om Of & Wh


will almost certainly win. Another example
ed in Diagrams 7, 8, and 9. In all three dia-
grams, Black is contemplating a move to f8
(an A-square). In Diagram 7, such a move
would be a disaster. It flips the whole f col-
umn to Black, and after a White move to a2,
Black would be forced to go to either b2 or
b7 (X-squares) on his next move, losing ei-
ther the al or a8 comer. In Diagram 8, the
move to f8 is moderately successful, but by
flipping the discs at f6 and f7, it cuts off ac-

cess to other squares (particularly g8) which
could be important later. A move to g4

would probably have been better. Contrast
this to the move to f8 in Diagram 9. Here,

the move does not open up any new moves
for White, while it retains the g8 option for

Black. It is an excellent move in terms of
mobility optimization. In fact, after White-

a2, Black-g8, itis now White who will lose a

corner! The point of all this is that the value
of f8 (or any square) is never an absolute. It

is always a function of the current overall
board position. If this is taken into account

properly, then an attempt to rate the relative
(and changing) values of squares is possible

and useful. This is referred to as dynamic

square evaluation. Together with mobility -
optimization, it forms the heart of basic Diagram 9: Black to move

Othello: Brief & Basic 5
Othello strategy.
4. Good Moves and Bad Moves: Gaining Control

What constitutes a good move in Othello? Without reference to specific positions, a
good move can be typically defined in terms of the principles of gaining and maintain-
ing control (with the ultimate aim of acquiring stable discs). That is, a move that in-
creases, maintains or minimally decreases your future mobility while simultaneously
limiting your opponent's mobility is a good move. Unfortunately, applying this princi-
ple to specific positions is often far from a simple matter. Here are some guidelines:

It is technically possible to have control of the game with more discs on the board
than your opponent, with less discs, or with about an equal number of discs. However,
most expert players agree that the easiest way to get control of the game is by maintain-
ing fewer discs than your opponent (1.e. maintaining a low disc count). This is referred
to as evaporation strategy. The rationale for this is that, since your opponent needs to
flip at least one of your discs to make a legal move, the less discs you have on the board,
the less legal moves he is likely to have (i.e. move limitation). Thus, in Diagrams 7-9,
the f8 move in Diagram 7 could be said to be the worst because it flipped the most discs,
while the move to f8 in Diagram 9 was the best because it flipped the least discs. The
advantages of this approach are so great that if one player makes judicious use of evapo-
ration while the other does not, the evaporation strategist will almost always win.

It may be, particularly in a game between two experts, that neither player can estab-
lish a successful evaporation. The game remains roughly even until the endgame. Alter-
natively, one player may succeed in getting control of the game early and acquiring one
or more comers. At these points, evaporation inevitably becomes less important. After
all, at some point you have to start flipping lots of discs or you cannot win the game.
Thus, the value of each square, in terms of the number of stable discs that will be ac-
quired, becomes more important. For this reason, evaporation strategy tends to have de-
creased importance for endgame play.

Similarly, the ultimate goal remains mobility optimization, not simply evaporation.
A move that flips several discs may at times leave your opponent with less options than
a move that just flips one disc. For example, if most of your discs are centrally located,
while your opponent's discs are spread out along the periphery, you are said to have
"control of the center." This is generally desirable. Thus, interior squares are typically
better to occupy than peripheral (or frontier) discs. This is because (1) flipping interior
discs generally does not open up as many new moves for your opponent as flipping
frontier discs would, and (2) maintaining a compact center of connected interior discs
tends to lead to more mobility for yourself than having your pieces scattered around the

periphery. A move that flips only interior

a boc de f g h discs may therefore be more desirable than
= a move that flips mainly frontier discs, even
1 C) if the latter move flips less discs overall.
Note: Black's position in Diagram 5 repre-
2 O CO) ® ® sents good control of the center.

Also, remember that mobility optimiza-

z > Y Op
O O eee tion does not just refer to the number of op-
4 OA tions available. It takes into consideration
both option quantity and option quality.
a eee The more moves you have available, the
greater your option quantity. The more de-
6 (liGe® sirable those moves are, the greater your
3 ‘oe C) option quality. The good player realizes
5 se O O that a smaller number of men quality op-
Fs tions may be more desirable than a larger
: oe ie number of low quality options. To take an
Diagram 10: Black to move extreme example, it would most commonly

Othello: Brief & Basic
be preferable to have your access limited to 2 corner squares rather than to 4 X-squares.

A special type of frontier disc position is called a wall: an area of frontier discs,
along one side of the board, that are of all one color. Generally, it is inadvisable to form
walls. If your opponent should form one, itis generally advisable not to break across the
wall (e.g. move to the unoccupied squares beyond the wall) unless no other viable
moves remain. The potential problems of forming a wall are illustrated in Diagram 10.
Note the relative merits of a Black move to f7 as opposed to e7. The f7 move forms a
wall on the east side of the board, severely limiting Black's future options, while open-
ing up many new moves for White. Quite simply, it is a bad move. The move to e7,
while it flips the same number of discs, is a far better move. The e7 move flips only in-
terior discs, forming a connected, centrally located cluster of discs for Black. The result
(control of the center) is increased mobility (e.g. Black now has access to b4), while f7
is the only new move opened for White.

Note that edge squares are a partial exception to these generalizations about walls
and evaporation: since a player cannot flip past an edge, a "wall" of edge squares is not
a liability in the way that a non-edge wall would be. Thus, in Diagram 6, the wall of
Black discs along the south edge did not hurt
Black since they provided no moves for a boc de f go h
White. Still, expert players are often reluc-
tant to take edge squares in the early part of 1
the game. First, taking edges tends to oppose
trying to get control of the center (but see Di-
agram 11 and Point #16). Second, occupied
edge squares often become liabilities later in
the game for a variety of reasons (see Pot
#7 for one major example).

Ces)

5. Good Moves and Bad Moves:
Planning Ahead


QO@Ce®

This point cannot be emphasized enough: O
successful evaporation, mobility optimiza-
tion or whatever, depends not merely on
what is best for the current position, but Diagram 11-A: Mowes 25-26
what 1s likely to be best based on what the
board will be like 2,3, 4 or even more moves
later. It is this ability to see what conse- a oboode f g h
quences a move ts likely to have on subse-
quent moves that separates the expert from 1
the average player. The farther you can "see"
ahead, the better you will play. A good move
in Othello can almost never be determined
simply by a static view of the current board
position. OC)
One of the unique difficulties of Othello
is that, since many pieces may get flipped 6
with each move (particularly in the end- O
game), it can be extremely difficult to visual-
ize the future board position (though com- CO)
puters have little difficulty with this aspect
of Othello). Still, one must do the best one
can. An example that clearly shows the ben- ,
efits of planning ahead is in Diagram 11. Uiagram 11-B: After move 26
Here we see how, with some foresight,
Black can take a superficially even position,

BOCeG8
ee eee


_) ©


Oo a om Of & Wo ht

Othello: Brief & Basic 7
Oo a mm Oh fF Wo ht

oO aS om Of & Wh

and gain complete control of the game. The sequence of moves results in Black forcing
White to give up the a8 comer. The a7 move, in particular, took away several of White's
options (i.e. d8, g5, and d3). Thus, the advantages of the a7 move become apparent only
if Black anticipates the consequences of the next several moves. For example, the se-
quence of moves would not have "worked" if Black's a3 move had flipped White's disc
at b3. This is because it would have prevented Black's subsequent move 27 to a2.

6. Isolated C-square Traps

We now begin to shift attention away from strategy (the focus of points #1 - #5) and
move towards tactics. Though the dividing line 1s not always clear, strategy tends to fo-
cus on more general discussions of goals and objectives while tactics refer to more spe-
cific techniques for implementing these goals. For example, in this section we demon-
strate a "trick" or a "trap" that will force your opponent to concede a corner, no matter
how many moves he might have available at the time. It requires that your opponent oc-
cupy a C-square along an edge that is otherwise empty (or nearly so)(1.e. an isolated C-
square). Actually, this trap will rarely occur in a game between good players, because
they will avoid the positions that would permit it. However, the threat of such traps 1s

often sufficient to constrain your opponent's
h moves. In any case, you need to know of
these traps, if only to avoid falling into them
yourself.

Two examples of this trap are given in
Diagrams 12 and 13. In Diagram 12, Black
followed White's move to gl (the isolated
C-square) with a move to dl. White is now
unable to take any moves along the critical
North edge and so might choose to go to g5,
(for example). Wherever White goes, Black
continues with f1! Now White is forced to
give up the hl corner (.e. White-e1, Black-
h1!). Note how this trap would have failed if
White could have moved to the North edge
(e.g. to el) prior to Black's move to f1. In
. . Diagram 13, White responded to Black's g1
Diagram 12: White to move (isolated C-square) move with a move to cl.

This is a stronger move than the d1 move in
Diagram 12 since, even if White moves to
h the edge, Black is still guaranteed the h1 cor-
ner (as long as Black maintains access to the
North edge). For example, if White goes to
d1, Black continues with f1. The most com-
plex sequences occur if White avoids the
Cy edge altogether (e.g. by going to g5). If this
occurs, Black continues by going to el.
| Now, once again, White is helpless to pre-
vent the loss of the corner (e.g. White-b6,
Black-f1). If all these seems a bit hard to fol-
low, remember: take out a board, set up the
positions in the Diagrams, and play them
out. I guarantee that all will become clear
shortly.

In summary: you are in danger of suc-
cumbing to these traps only if two precondi-
tions are met: (1) the appropriate isolated C-

a b oc e f


OOS -


eo Cr

| JS
Lh 1

Diagram 13: White to move

Othello: Brief & Basic
square edge position exists, and (2) your op-
ponent has access (i.e. legal moves) to the a_t
necessary squares to complete the trap. By 1
avoiding one or both of these preconditions,
you can avoid these traps. The best general
advice is to avoid going to isolated C-
squares altogether. But, as will be seen later,
once an edge begins to fill up (e.g. a C-
square would no longer be "isolated"), this
prohibition will usually no longer apply.
Finally, Diagram 14 shows an unusual C-
square trap position. Here, Black can take
the hl corner at will. But if he does so,
White can continue with cl, thereby gaining
undeniable access to the al corner.

eo Xs

oo Sy m® Om fF WwW bh

7. Unbalanced Edges Diagram 14: Black to move
Earlier, we commented that, despite all
the previous advice, in certain circumstances
going to an X-square can be a good move,
while going to a corner can be a poor one. 1
The ability to recognize these positions is
one of the hallmarks of the more advanced
Othello player. In this section, we discuss
the most basic of these situations: the unbal-
anced edge. An unbalanced edge is defined
as an edge occupied by five adjacent discs of
the same color immediately adjacent to a va-
cant corner. An example is given in Diagram
15. The north edge is unbalanced. Note the
consequences of this position: If Black takes
the X-square at b2, White may indeed follow Te oe
by taking the al comer. But Black can now C)
continue by filling in the wedge at bl (see =
Diagram 16 for resulting position). Now, no Diagram 15: Black to move
matter where White goes, Black now has un-
deniable access to the corner at hl. When
Black does go to h1, the entire row of discs b d
along the north edge (exceptforal) willbe-  ,
come stable discs for Black. In addition,
Black will then be able to gain further stable
discs by going to g2, and continuing to
march down to the h8 corner. If White had
tried to prevent all this by going to b1 initial-
ly Gnstead of a1), this would cause the b2
disc to be flipped to White, and Black will
get both the al and h1 corners! Thus, the X-
square move and the resulting corner sacri-
fice clearly worked to Black's advantage
(though if the discs along the east and west
edges had been Black, the advantage would
have been less). Conversely, though there
are numerous exceptions, an unbalanced ' j '
edge is a liability and should be avoided if Ut 29ham 18: Mhite to move
possible (unbalanced edges are another ex- (after b2-al-b1)


O@eQ 1O}
| Jee)
eee.
OeOeO
Lh ee)


oOo “Sy mm OM & tw bh


eee ee:
QOOO@COR?-
oe | Sie;

QOOOOO

oOo om  & iW hh

Othello: Brief & Basic 9
oOo -— mm Oh & iW RI


ample that should dispel the myth that edge squares are always good to take). Note that,
given the opportunity, it would usually be to White's advantage to balance the edge
(e.g. go to b1) prior to Black going to b2. Thus, unlike the isolated C-square positions
discussed in Point #6, a C-square move would be considered a good move. However, in
Diagram 15, White could not balance the edge because (since c2 was White) White did
not have access to b1.

But now a note about defense: In situations like the one in Diagram 15, after Black
goes to b2, White's best immediate defense is often to do just about anything except take
the al corner. The idea is to wait (and hope) for the board position to change such that
taking the al corner will no longer be the disastrous move it currently is. For example,
White may hope to force Black to go to g2 (sacrificing the hl corner), before White
goes toal.

Learning the dangers of the unbalanced edge is, however, only the beginning of this
topic. Actually, experts "take" unbalanced edges (i.e. make a move that results in the
formation of an unbalanced edge) quite often, and not merely when itis the lesser of al-
ternative evils. Taking an unbalanced edge can be a strong, even a game-winning,
move. This occurs most often in situations where you can prevent your opponent from
getting the wedge necessary to take advan-
tage of the unbalanced edge. Two examples
of this are shown in Diagram 17. First, if
Black goes to b2, White can now balance
the north edge by going to b1 (before going
to al) without flipping the disc at b2. This
will permit White to get both al and b1, de-
feating Black's attack on the edge. A simi-
lar type of problem is seen along the east
edge of Diagram 17. Here if Black tries to
attack the unbalanced edge by going to g7,
White continues with h8. However, Black
will not have legal access to h7 at this point,
giving White the opportunity to go to h7 on
his next move, once again defeating the
Cy threat of the unbalanced edge. In this situa-

tion, Black should delay the g7 move until
Diagram 17: Black to move af possible) a Black disc is securely located
in the seventh row, providing the necessary
access to h7.

Sometimes, an unbalanced edge that
seems safe from an X-square attack may
still be vulnerable to a move along the adja-
cent edge. This is the case in Diagram 18,
where Black's lack of access to b2 prevents
the conventional attack of the unbalanced
north edge. However, Black can go to the C-
square at a2 instead! If White follows by
taking the al corer, Black can successfully
fill in the wedge at bl. If White does not
take the al corner, Black then has the addi-
tional option of going to a7 and eliminating

OOOO

oOo “Sb om Mh & we bh


oe | Sie;
QOOOOO


White's opportunity to take the al corner at
all.
In summary, the potential liabilities of
C3 unbalanced edges are both simple and es-
; sential for the aspiring Othello expert to un-
Diagram 16; Black to move derstand. However, there are numerous sub-

tle nuances to the unbalanced edge position,

Othello: Brief & Basic
that are anything but simple. Knowing
whether or not to take an unbalanced edge,
or to attack a currently existing one, are
among the more difficult of all decisions in
Othello.

8. Controlling the Main Diagonal:
Stoner Traps and More

The main (or central) diagonals are the
two diagonals that run from al-h8 and from
a8-hl. A player is said to have control of
one of these diagonals when all the pieces
along that diagonal are of his color. There
are numerous ways to take advantage of this
control.

Stoner Traps. A Stoner trap (named
after John Stoner, the first U.S.O.A. member
known to use this trap) is a comer sacrifice/
exchange that depends on main diagonal
control. For example, in Diagram 19, White
can move to b7, gaining control of the a8-h1
main diagonal. As a result, despite White's
X-square disc, Black cannot yet take the a8
comer. Typically, Black will try to move to
a square that cuts across (i.e. flips a disc
along) the main diagonal, so as to gain ac-
cess to a8 (e.g. Black moves to f3). But
White's next move is to d8 (called the "at-
tack" square) (see Diagram 20). Now there is
no way to stop White from getting the h8
corer (and most of the south edge as well).
Black cannot go to b8 or he will flip the disc
at b7 and lose both the a8 and h8 corners. If
Black takes the corner at a8, White can then
take h8 directly or even (in this case) take
the wedge at b8 (maintaining access to h8).
If Black avoids both a8 and b8, White still
can go to h8 at any time (an advantage of
this position over a similar unbalanced edge
attack). This exchange of corners is usually
(but not always) favorable to the attacker
since he gets both the edge and a corner,
while his opponent gets only a corner.

The drawback of Stoner traps is that they
are often difficult to set-up, especially
against a knowledgeable opponent. To be
successful, at least four preconditions are re-
quired: (1) The opponent must have the req-
uisite edge position (the two most common
edge positions that are vulnerable to Stoner
traps are shown along the north and south
edges in Diagram 19). (2) The X-square

Othello: Brief & Basic

Oo a mm OW & Wo ht oOo so om tl & TW RK

Oo a om UO fF Wo ht


OCUCe@Ve-
eee _leee-

Diagram 20: Black to move

Clee!





Diagram 21: White to move

a hh

1 Oe!
ioe eee

OOOO



Diagram 23: Black to move

Cc. Je@et tes

oOo -s m Oo & WH

Diagram 24; White to move


move must result in control of the main di-
agonal. (3) There must be at least one disc of
the opponent's color i the column contain-
ing the X-square, e.g. the b column in Dia-
gram 20. (Otherwise, Black could have safe-
ly balanced the edge). (4) You must
maintain access to the edge square required
to complete the trap (e.g. d8 in Diagrams 19
and 20). For example, White could have
gone to b2 in Diagram 19, attempting a
Stoner trap along the north edge. But this
fails for at least two reasons: after Black
continues with g5, White does not have ac-
cess to cl. Even if he did, Black could fol-
low the cl move by safely going to bl. A
more subtle example of a failed Stoner trap
is in Diagram 21. Here, the trap fails be-
cause after White's move to b7, Black goes
to c3, gaining access to a8, while blocking
White from the critical c8 square.

Controlling the Diagonal. If you can
maintain control of a main diagonal, you
can move to the X-squares without allowing
your opponent access to the adjacent cor-
ners. In the endgame, this can be a critical
advantage (even in non-Stoner trap posi-
tions). For example, in Diagram 22, White
can go to b2 and assume control of the a1-h8
diagonal. Black cannot move to al now nor
even move to regain access to al. He is
forced to go to g2 or b7, losing a corner (and
the game as well).

Main diagonals can be so powerful, that
a good player 1s constantly on guard for pos-
sibilities of gaining or losing control of
them, particularly late in the game. Offen-
sively, the player should monitor when he
can take control (or set up to take control) of
a main diagonal. Defensively, the player
needs to be aware of when his opponent
may take effective control of a main diago-
nal, and whether the player then has the
ability to cut across it. Some examples of
these ideas are presented in Diagram 23.
Note the problems caused for Black by the
table position (occupying the 2 A-squares)
at the south end of the board. Novices often
see this as a desirable position, but it actual-
ly has a major liability: Black has no access
to d8 or e8 while White does. Thus, if
Black attempts to control the a8-h1 diagonal
by going to b7, White can respond with d8
or e8 and cut across the diagonal. Alterna-
tively, White could go to gl, establishing
control of the al-h8 diagonal, safe in the

Othello: Brief & Basic
Summary & Preview

In the previous sections, we demonstrated the importance of the four corner squares,
and how a major part of Othello strategy focuses on how to best obtain corners yourself,
while preventing your opponent from domg so. At the same time, we saw several cases
(e.g. unbalanced edges, Stoner traps) where deliberately giving up a comer (typically by
going to an X-square) was a good (even a game-winning) move. Understanding these posi-
tions typically depended on being able to recognize particular board patterns. But more
than that, these positions demonstrated an important principle about Othello. Specifically,
in a typical game between two expert Othello players, one player is rarely able to acquire
all 4 comers. Recognizing this, the critical question becomes not how to prevent your op-
ponent from ever getting a commer, but when 1s the best time (and how is the best way) to
concede a corner. It is almost always better to concede a corner on your terms than to be
forced to give up a corner later on your opponent's terms. As comedians are fond of saying:
"It's all in the timing!" Indeed, many players, even experts, have lost games essentially be-
cause they were too reluctant to give away a corner at an opportune time. On the other
hand, players may also lose games by overlooking unusual ways to force an opponent to
give up a corner (or other positional advantage), ways that work only because the timing or
position is "right." The next few sections expand on these fundamental concepts.

9. Gaining and Losing Tempo

A player is said to gain a tempo when he achieves an advantage of timing by deriv-
ing one more viable move than his opponent from play within a limited area of the
board and thereby forcing the opponent to initiate play elsewhere (it is similar to the
concept of sente — or initiative —in Go). Gaining and maintaining a tempo advantage 1s
akey concept in Othello strategy. Let's look at this idea in more detail.

A safe move is loosely defined as a move that is not the proximate cause of giving
your opponent a comer. For example, going to an X-square early in the game is defi-
nitely not a safe move. This definition does not take into consideration the numerous
tres that giving up a corer is a good
move, but it serves us well for the majority
of midgame situations. Typically, as the
board fills up with discs, several distinct re- 1
gions of empty squares develop. It is useful
to keep track of the number of safe moves
available to you (and to your opponent) in
each of these regions. As play expands to
the periphery of the board, we can initially
conceive of each side of the board as having
10 potentially safe squares (see Diagram
25), though this can change with the board
position. The move to the last safe square
available to either player in a given area of
the board is called the last move (making
the last move of the game a special case of
the "last move"). Taking a "last move" has
the generally desirable effect of forcing Diagram 25: Shaded ogreas
your opponent to initiate play elsewhere on are "safe move" regions
the board. If your opponent has no other
safe moves on the board, you are said to have "run your opponent out of moves"
(causing your opponent to concede a corner) (see also Point #3). Gaining a tempo is of-
ten an effective way to accomplish these goals (see also Point #10).

For example, in Diagram 26, it is White to play. Note that Black has only one safe
move on the board: g5. If White can eliminate this without opening up any more safe
moves, White will gain a comer. White clearly does not want to disturb the North edge

a bed ef 4 oh



Oo som th f& WwW hi

Othello: Brief & Basic 13


a) OM}

Diagram 26: White t


eo_e@
LM _



Mowe

Lt hh
tb Oo XS
O@Cleee
eK JS)
oe ie
eeeeee

Diagram 27: White to move

OOOO

eeeeee

oOo -— mm (Oh & TH RI



oOo -s m Oo & WH

Diagram 26; White to move


(as this opens up good new moves for
Black) so he will want to go to either h6 or
g5 itself. The h6 move doesn't succeed:
Black simply goes to g5 and White is now
forced to open up the North edge (see Dia-
gram 27). The g5 move is correct: this opens
up a new safe move for Black (h6), but after
Black goes there, White can continue with
h7(!) (Diagram 28). White has now gotten
the last move in that region (via a gain in
tempo) and (in this case) Black is forced to
give up a comer. Whenever you find your-
self with more safe moves than your oppo-
nent (and a means of reducing your oppo-
nent's safe moves), it is worth considering
attempting this. As usual, success depends
upon being able to plan ahead: coming up
one move short of running your opponent
out of moves often spells disaster. Another
word of caution: recall that X-squares are
not always bad moves, and forcing your op-
ponent to concede a corner may not hurt
him. Thus, in Diagram 28, imagine that a7
was vacant. Now after a White move to h7,
Black (though forced to give up a corner)
goes to the b7 X-square, attacking the un-
balanced west edge. In this position, the fi-
nal outcome of the game is no longer clear.
(Note: it is possible to get more than one ex-
tra move in a region -- resulting in a double,
or even triple, gain in tempo!)

A related type of move associated with
tempo is the free move. A free move is a
play that can be deferred until later in the
game and which when taken will not open
up any new safe moves for one's opponent.
It is really a just a special type of safe move
(usually a tempo-gaining last move as well).
White has a potential free move at h7 in Dia-
gram 29. Free moves are like money in the
bank. Don't use them until you need to or un-
til you can make good use of them. Thus, in
Diagram 29, it would be a mistake for White
to take this free move now. Black would
simply respond with c8 and White 1s forced
to open up the North side of the board for
Black (or concede a corner). Instead, White
should play to c8 directly, leading to a likely
b8 response by Black. Now White goes to
h7 and Black is out of safe moves entirely.

Another dramatic example of the power
of free moves is in Diagram 30. Here Black
has two free moves at a2 and a7. Despite
White's possession of three corners, Black is
in control of the game, i the sense that
White not only has no safe moves, he has no

Othello: Brief & Basic
moves at all! Computers can analyze end-
game positions like this in order to deter-
mine the "perfect-play" sequence of re- 1
maining moves: the sequence of moves that
occurs if each player makes the best possi-
ble available move at each turn. With per-
fect subsequent play, Black wins 44-20 (h4-
h5-a2-h2-h3-¢7-h8-h7-a7-pass-g8). Note 6
that neither the a2 nor a7 free move was tak-
en immediately. In fact the a7 move was de- CO)
ferred until the next to last move of the
game. t
The types of tempo-gaining plays dis- Se
cussed in this section are often referred to as
"squeeze plays." Gaining a tempo 1s usually
considered advantageous even if it does not
immediately lead to the gain of a comer. I Diagram 29;
cannot overemphasize the importance of
this concept for successful Othello play.


Oo a m Ch B&B Wht

eee lee
eee Ove



10. Odd and Even Regions of the
Board u

In the previous section we mentioned
how, as the game develops, the board is fre-
quently subdivided in separate regions of
vacant squares. In this section we discuss a
particularly noteworthy aspect of these re-
gions (one that becomes most relevant dur-
ing the endgame): whether there are an odd
or even number of vacant squares in the re-
gion. Most typically, we are referring to re-
gions of two to five empty squares in the
area surrounding a comer. Making the cor-
rect play in these important regions depends
upon an understanding of last move and
tempo (Point #9). For example, let's begin
by looking at the last two moves of the
game.

In Diagram 31, it is Black to play at
move 59. Note Black's dilemma: which ever
square he takes (h1 or h2), White gets the re-
maining one (i.e. the last move), as well as
securing either the North or the East edge.
This is sufficient to give White the victory.
In situations like this, Black would be happy
to be able to pass. Then, White would have
to go to h2, Black would get the last move at
h1, and Black would win the game. The gen-
eral principle here 1s that White was at an
advantage because Black was forced to
move first into an even-numbered region
(i.e. an area containing an even number of
vacant squares), giving White the last move.
Actually, in a typical game, White always Diagram
gets the last move (since Black always goes

QOOOO Or



Oo a om Oh ff Wh

OQ, OCRCIOL Cr


Di 30: Black to move


eeees ith

Ce JO Je ee

OOO UG@W)-

POO @OOOO
@OOe@@OOC’


ack to move

Othello: Brief & Basic 15






first), giving White an important advantage in the endgame (One major exception to
this is, of course, if there has been a passed move. This, in turn, implies that it would be
to Black's advantage to create an odd number of passed moves. Also see Point #11).
Does all this mean that White has a better overall chance of winning than Black does
(all other things equal)? This question is still an unresolved debate among expert Othel-
lo players. Most players feel that Black has an advantage in the opening (for reasons to
be discussed in subsequent sections), while White has the advantage (just explained) in
the endgame. Some feel that Black's initial advantage should give him enough of an
edge to compensate for White's endgame advantage. Others disagree. But one thing 1s
certain: we have now strayed too far from our main point. Let's return to it.

The type of situation described above for the last two moves in the game, usually oc-
curs several times earlier in the game as each of the corner regions gets "filled in." In
each of these regions, it is typically disadvantageous to move first into an even-
numbered region. Conversely, it is usually advantageous to move first into an odd-
numbered region (for the same reason: this gets you the last move in that region). One
of the surprising corollaries of all this is that it is often advantageous to move into an
odd-numbered region even if it means giving up a corner to do so. Let's look at some
examples.

In Diagram 32, it is White's move, but

Black is in serious trouble. If it were now

aoboic gd é¢ figih Black's turn, Black would be forced to
choose among g7, h2, or h7 (all of which are
disastrous). In order for White to force those
choices on Black, he must gain a tempo
without opening up any new safe moves for
Black. To accomplish this, White needs to
move to the southwest corner area, an odd-


eeeee
th Lo oee
C eee 16

or b8, allowing Black to take the a8 comer.
White then takes the last move in that area
(b7 or b8), gaining a tempo and forcing
Black to make one of the disastrous moves
discussed above. From this position, White
is likely to go on to win the game!
Now that you know the main principle,
Diagram 32: White to move here's the bad news: There are many posi-
tions similar to that shown in Diagram 32
that will not work as well. A good player
needs to be able to distinguish the phony
from the real thing. For example, in Dia-
gram 33, a White move to b7 fails: Black
can safely move to a8, since White will be
unable to follow with b8. Black then gets
the last move in that region (b8) on his next
turn. Meanwhile, White is forced to open up
the North edge, and his momentum 1s lost.
Fortunately for White, a move to b8, in Dia-
gram 33, will work. But change the disc at
c6 (in Diagram 33) to White. Now neither
b7 nor b8 will work (try it!). Other varia-

eee e” tions of this sort exist. The general advice is:
1@ ecee For the technique to work, you must have
eeee access to the last move in the region. Once
again there is no substitute for planning

Diagram 33: White to move ahead! But the good news is that many times
it does work -- as it does in the example

rice

Ck er 1S)

OOOO

Othello: Brief & Basic
shown in Diagram 34. Here, Black has con-
trol of the al-h8 main diagonal, with no clear
way for White to cut across it. But White can
take advantage of the odd-numbered region
in the northwest corner area by going to b2.
This forces Black to respond with al (or
White will continue with h8). Now White
goes to a2, gaining undeniable access to h8!

As mentioned above, it is typically disad-
vantageous to move into an even-numbered
region if you are doing so to gain a tempo
(because you and your opponent typically
exchange moves, with your opponent getting
the last move). But there are numerous ex-
ceptions to this too. For example, m Dia-
gram 35, if White moves to b7, Black typi-
cally responds by taking the a8 corner. But
now, White gets both a7 and b8, getting
three (rather than just two) of the four moves
in that region, in addition to the last move. In
fact, a7 and b8 are now free moves, and may
be advantageously deferred until later in the
game. In positions like this, the best defense
for Black is typically to decline the a8 move
as long as possible, hoping for a favorable
change in the board position. Finally, bear in
mind that, despite these exceptions, they re-
main exceptions. The rule still "works" most
of the time. [Note: the player with the last
move advantage in all of these positions is
said to have parity. Players typically make
moves to maintain parity. |

11. Blocking Techniques: Access
and Poisoned Moves

Blocking techniques refer to ways to
prevent your opponent from taking an other-
wise good move. Naturally, you should be
alert both to when you can make such block-
ing moves as well as when your opponent
may be able to block your good move.

Denying Access. Numerous times in the
preceding discussions we have used the term
access. For example, it was a key concept to
understanding control of the main diagonals
(Point #8). Now itis time to examine it more
formally. Quite simply, you are said to have
access to a particular square if you can legal-
ly go there. A lack of access to a particular
square is a type of block, and often a quite
frustrating one. Thus, In Diagram 36, White
would easily win the game if he could sim-
ply go to b8. But he can't, and so he must go
to g2 or g7 instead, losing the game.

Othello: Brief & Basic


‘| eeeoe
2| | @eVle
OOO CVe
‘I8eecle

eeee UT @-
OOOO

Oo a mm OW & Wo ht


White to move

Diagram 33:


ooee
oe \)

oe | Sie,

oOo - mm Oo & WH hh

Diagram 36; White to move

oOo -— mm Oh & HW

Diagram 37: Black to move



O08 eeOe:

QOOOOO
OOOOOO

oe Cee


Diagram 38: Black to move

Oo som th f& HW bi


eeeee
eyyi

K XX

oOo a mm Om & WH

Diagram 39: Black to move


An expert Othello player does more than
hope to avoid these situations (or find his
opponent in them), he works to accomplish
these goals. In particular, he watches the
board so as to maintainhis own access to
critical squares while similarly denying ac-
cess to his opponent's critical squares. Let's
consider some other examples.

In Diagram 37, Black is concerned that
White may eventually find it desirable to at-
tack his unbalanced edge by going to g7.
Seeking to prevent this, Black goes to bS.
The unique advantage of this move over oth-
er acceptable moves (e.g. c2 or d1), is that it
flips the disc at g5 to Black. Now White no
longer has access to g7 and Black's unbal-
anced edge is relatively safe. Later in the
game, a naive White may feel that he was
simply "unlucky" not to have access to 97,
but it was actually Black's foresight that was
responsible. In Diagram 38, Black wants to
block White's future access to the a8 corner
region. Black can effect this by moving to
e8. This pressures White to respond with d8
(otherwise Black would go there on his next
tum, and gain a tempo). But White's d8
move flips the Black discs at b6 and c7 to
White, sealing-off the region to White. The
potential weakness of a sealed-off corner
area is clearly shown in Diagram 39. Here
White is sealed-off from the odd-numbered
region surrounding the al corner. Black
takes advantage of this by going to g8 (ae.
moving into the only other odd-numbered
region on the board). This, in effect, shifts
the "last move" advantage (discussed in
Point #10) from White to Black. Thus, be-
cause White cannot go to the al comer area
(e.g. a2 would have been a game-winning
move!), White must now give a comer and
lose the game. Indeed, Black (with proper
play) can now get the last move in each of
the 4 corner regions.

Finally, it is worth noting that denial of
access is just another perspective on the ma-
jor principles of move limitation and "run-
ning your opponent out of moves" etc. that
have been discussed previously. For exam-
ple, determine what move you would make
as White in Diagram 40. The critical obser-
vation is that Black currently has only one
safe move: e8. If you can take it away with-
out opening up any new safe moves, Black
will be forced to concede a corner. Taking
e8 itself doesn't work: Black continues with
b8. The move that succeeds is a6! You have

Othello: Brief & Basic
now denied Black access to e8 by flipping
the Black disc at c6. Black must now make
what is likely to be a game-losing move. 1

Poisoned moves. A poisoned move is
another type of blocking move. Actually it is
like a "semi-denial" of access: you do not le-
gally prevent the opponent from moving to a
square; you simply make it undesirable to do
so. Technically, a poisoned move 1s defined
as a move that cannot be made without flip-
ping unwanted discs. As was true for deny-
ing access, the good Othello player actively
searches for opportunities to make this type
of move. Thus, in Diagram 41, White has
two apparently good moves, a7 and f2 (e.g.
neither move opens up any new safe moves
for Black). However, White should avoid the
a7 move for the moment, preferring the f2
move. This is because Black currently has a
good move at f8. But after White moves to
f2, the f8 move becomes poisoned (ie. it 1
would flip all the White discs in the f col-
umn, creating an undesirable wall for = C)

Black).

[A slight digression: One reason why oc- 3 IC Wee
cupying edge squares is often thought of as
undesirable is that they tend to poison other- 4 eee
wise good moves. Thus in Diagram 42, 5 SS. 8
Black is considering the reasonably good
move to g4: it only flips one disc (f5) with- ell) eee
out any great benefits to White's mobility.
However, consider the consequences of the f eo
g4 move if Black takes it after first goingto ry =
the cl edge square (with a probable a2 White
response). Now, because of the new Black Diagram 41: White ta move
edge pieces, the g4 move will flip both e2
and f3 as well as g4. This opens up the f2
move to White. The g4 move no longer a oboe
looks as desirable. It is said to have been
self-poisoned. Thus, the timing (i.e. the se- 1 (>
quence of moves) is critical: if you wish to
take both g4 and cl, you should probably CW
take g4 first. Note that self-poisoning,
though frequently resulting from edge
square moves, can occur as a result of any
type of move. A related concept is "unpoi-
soning": changing a currently undesirable
move for an opponent into a desirable one by
flipping a disc that was acting to poison the
opponent's move. Typically, you wish to
avoid unpoisoning opponent's moves. Thus,
again in Diagram 42, a Black move to h6
should probably be avoided: it unpoisons the
White move to a6 by flipping the poisoning Diagram 42; Black to move
White disc at g6.


oo -— mm Oo & WW




oO -— m Oh & WW

Othello: Brief & Basic 19
co am Oh f& Th mo oa om of f& Wh

oO a om Of fF Wh



A Oe
eS see

Diagram 43; White to move


CL eee

WOOOOOOCISr

MOO @O




ion}



eee Ie,
00000):
0000”):
Je (Seen
( {Jet lie;


Diagram 45: Black to move

While we're on the subject, note how
White's moves along the South edge are pot-
soned by White's discs along the West edge
and East side of the board. ]

Still another way to block an opponent
from taking a desirable move is to take it
yourself. This is obviously a good alterna-
tive if such a move would be a good one for
you anyway. Yet sometimes, this type of
block can be effective despite initial appear-
ances to the contrary. For example, in Dia-
gram 43, about the only way that White can
permanently prevent Black's good move to
f3 is to take it himself. However, White may
be reluctant to do this because it also flips
the Black discs at f4 and f5, creating a White
wall along the east side. None-the less, the
move works out well for White: no matter
where Black goes next, White can eventual-
ly get the excellent move to e6, and the pres-
sure is now on Black.

In summary, when your opponent has a
good move, there are generally three things
you can do to prevent it: a) deny access to
the move, b) poison the move, or c) take the
move yourself. Of course, if you have more
than enough good moves yourself, you may
simply choose to ignore your opponent's
good move altogether. If more than one of
these alternatives is possible, the best one
can only be determined (surprise!) by exam-
ining the overall board position (see also
Point #15).

12. The Semi-Forcing Move

A semi-forced move is a move which is
forced not by the rules of the game, but rath-
er by tactical considerations. In practice, the
"tactical consideration" is most often that,
unless the player takes the semi-forced
move, he will lose a corner. The opponent's
move that puts a player in this position is
called the semi-forcing move. Proper use of
semi-forcing moves can be a powerful tech-
nique, and really we have already seen sev-
eral examples of it. Thus, the e8 move in Di-
agram 38 (though it did not directly threaten
a comer) semi-forced a d8 response, sealing
White off from the southwest corner area.
Let's look at a few more examples.

In Diagram 44, White would have a great
move to f7, if it was not poisoned by his
discs at f1 and f2. White can set this up by
first moving to el, semi-forcing a g1 reply

Othello: Brief & Basic
by Black (and flipping the critical f1 and f2 discs). Now White continues with f7 and
Black must sacrifice a corner, and the game!

In Diagram 45, Black would like to block White's access to b1. He can do this by
moving to a3. This semi-forces an a4 reply, which in turn flips the c2 disc to White, pre-
venting White from balancing the edge. Having accomplished this, Black has another
semi-forcing move available that is probably even better: go to h5 (adjacent to White's
uneven three). This semi-forces White to respond with h6, flipping the Black discs in
the sixth row to White (sharply reducing White's future mobility).

13. Mobility Reconsidered

With the perspective of our most recent discussions, let's now re-examine some 1s-
sues related to the all-important principle of mobility optimization (see Points #3 & 4).

Regional Mobility. In some situations, there may be several safe moves that all flip
about the same amount of discs. A strict application of evaporation techniques suggest
they should be about equally good moves. How do you decide between them?

One idea, previously discussed, is to prefer the move that flips more interior discs.
But what if (as is more common) all your choices are about equal in this respect as well?
Here you should still be guided by the idea that you want to open up as few new safe
moves for your opponent as possible. One general rule is (almost paradoxically) take
the move that is in the area where your opponent already has the most amount of poten-
tial moves (i.e. the area of greatest regional mobility). The logic is that discs flipped in
this region will only minimally increase your opponent's mobility since they will tend to
provide access to squares that the opponent already has access to. Another way of stat-
ing this same rule is: move to the area where your own mobility is the most limited. The
hope is to lure play into this area, getting your opponent to use up all his safe moves
there, thereby eliminating his regional advantage.

One example is in Diagram 46, where it is White to move. Let's consider the vari-
ous possibilities. Clearly, a move like f3 would be undesirable, flipping seven discs
(mostly along the frontier), and severely lim-
iting White's future mobility. A move to g3
may seem initially to be a good move as it a_eb
only flips one black disc. However, Black's
mobility in this eastern region is currently
zero and any move in this area would have
the negative effect of “opening up" the area
to Black (e.g. after g3, Black could move to
f3 and be set up for a further move to h3).
Generally better is to move into the area
where Black already has some mobility: the
western edge of the board in this case. For
example, a move to a6 does not open up any
new moves for Black! Note that not all
moves in this western region are necessarily
equal. For example, compare the a6 move to
another similar, though less desirable, move
to b6. The b6 move, by flipping both the
discs at b5 and c5, totally shuts off the region
to White, while the a6 move only "picks off"
(i.e. flips) the b5 disc, leaving the c5 disc for a possible White move to b6 on his next
turn.

Sometimes, if you can see ahead a sufficient number of moves, you may realize
that after all the exchanges of moves in an open region, your opponent will get the last
move and you will be forced to open up a closed (to your opponent) region anyway (e.g.
east region is closed to Black in Diagram 46). In such cases, it may pay to move to the

o eee.

Oo som th f& HW bi

QOO@OCe@

Diagram 46: White to move

Othello: Brief & Basic 21
Oo a om Ch & Wo ht

Oo a om Of & Wo bh

Before and after moves 8-10

oOo -— mm Oh & HW


102)

OOOO



OOCO
102)

Diagram 47:

Diagram 46: White to move

closed region immediately rather than first
filling up all the remaining safe moves in the
open region. In other words, when on the de-
fensive, it is generally better not to simplify
the board position (see also Point #16 (dou-
ble walls) and Point #20).

Checkerboarding. Sometimes, particu-
larly in some opening positions, the best way
to mimimize your opponent's options is with
the opposite of evaporation: obtaining a vast
majority of discs rather than a minimum.
This is especially true if you can leave your
opponent's discs scattered along the frontier
where they tend to block each other's moves
(called checkerboarding your opponent).
The goal here is to force your opponent to
make a bad move before he can regain con-
trol of the center and attack your suddenly
vulnerable position. One example is in Dia-
gram 47. Here White's surprise moves, at 8
and 10, leave Black with only two discs. But
note that except for a move to h4 (which
White can counter with h6), all of Black's
possible moves flip at least three (mostly
frontier) discs. White is really in fairly good
shape here. If you find yourself checker-
boarded, the general advice is either to wait
it out as long as possible (by taking moves
like h4), hoping for your opponent to col-
lapse under his own vast disc majority, or to
find a move that quickly reestablishes con-
trol of the center without creating too many
other liabilities (such as possibly f3 in Dia-
gram 47).

A technique, related to checkerboard-
ing, is to keep your opponent's disc count so
low that he is threatened with a wipe-out
(i.e. reducing your opponent's disc count to
zero whereby you instantly win the game).
Even if the wipe-out attempt fails, the threat
of it can sometimes force your opponent into
an awkward position. For example in Dia-
gram 48, it may seem like c2 1s White's best
move, but actually f7 is the winning move.
This reduces Black to only one disc (at d2).
More importantly, wherever Black now
moves (except g2), White will be able to
achieve a wipe-out on his next turn. Of
course, after Black takes g2, White will fol-
low by taking the h1 comer and is still head-
ed for victory. To protect against this, Black
needed to watch for the danger of being left
with only one or two pieces that are sur-
rounded by opponent's discs. However, there
is a more-or-less permanent way to elimi-

Othello: Brief & Basic
nate the possibility of being wiped out: obtain a relatively secure edge piece. Such a
piece is called an "anchor." For example, imagine that there is a White disc at b4 in Di-
agram 48. Now, White's move to f7 fails to work: Black can take the edge anchor at a5,
the wipe-out threat is gone, and itis White who is in serious trouble.

Both the checkerboard and the wipe-out attempts are risky maneuvers that should
not be attempted often. Unless you are absolutely certain of their success, they are best
saved for those desperate defensive situations where all the more conventional alterna-
tives seemed doomed to fail.

Now, we shift our attention to aspects of Othello that are specific to the three different
phases of the game. Most of what we have discussed thus far bears primarily on the mid-
game. The extreme beginning and end of the game are special cases and deserve special
consideration. We will focus on them (as well as one additional aspect of midgame strate-
gy) in the next several points. Some of this discussion will be a repetition of material cov-
ered in previous points, except now the focus will be on a particular phase of the game.

14. The Opening: The Three Basic Variations

There is a feeling, among many Othello players, that generalizations of strategy
have such limited applicability in the opening, as to be practically useless. In particular,
with so few discs on the board, positions are too volatile and relative advantages too
easily shifted to currently visualize a move's ultimate worth. Thus, there are no immedi-
ate goals in the opening (according to this viewpoint); one simply avoids major blun-
ders and hopes that an advantageous midgame position (in terms of mobility etc.) will
result. In my opinion, this is only partially true. Some ideas about strategy and tactics in
the opening can be forcefully made (see Point #15). At the same time, as in games like
chess, it will also be useful to develop an "opening book" (1.e. a collection of prepared,
memorized sequences of opening moves that are followed primarily because previous
experience has shown them to work well). All expert players have at least a limited
opening book. There is also some general agreement about which are the better open-
ings (with the result that some openings occur quite frequently, while others do not oc-
cur at all).

Some players limit their opening books to the first 6-8 moves, relying on their gener-
al knowledge about Othello to carry them from that pomt. Other players have an exten-
sive collection of potential openings (tediously prepared!), often reaching to move 20
and beyond. The success of these longer prepared openings depends upon many things,
not the least of which is the ability to anticipate an opponent's likely responses (e.g.
there is no point in preparing an opening sequence to counteract a move that no oppo-
nent will ever make!). Despite the difficulties in preparing these longer openings, I be-
lieve they are worth the effort. First, it allows you to make moves "automatically," sav-
ing time on your clock (which is important in tournaments, where you typically have 30
minutes or less to make all your moves). Second, you will frequently gain an opening
advantage over a less prepared oppponent; this alone may be sufficient to give you the
edge needed to win the game!

However, a beginning player is not likely to have the skill necessary to develop
openings on his own. Until such skills are acquired, the best course for such a player 1s
to study (and memorize) the openings already used by expert players. There 1s not suffi-
cient space in this Handbook to detail even close to a majority of these expert openings.
However, we can discuss some of the most common sequences in the first 8-10 moves.
Transcripts of games from tournaments (as regularly published in OQ) are particularly
good sources of further ideas about openings. As you gain experience, you will hopeful-
ly develop the ability to expand upon and add to these openings.

The first point about openings is that Black's first move 1s not really a choice at all.
That is, all 4 of Black's potential first moves are either a rotation or a mirror image of
each other. It is White that makes the first move that affects the course of the game. So,
for simplicity, let's assume Black's first move is always to c4. White now has three

Othello: Brief & Basic 23
SIA

oo -— mm Oo & WW

Diagram 49: White's 3 choices
at move 2 after Black 1. c4


Oo a om Ch & Wo ho

Diagram 30; Black to move



oOo -s m Oo & WH

Diagram 31: White to move


choices: c3, e3, or c5. These are called the
Diagonal, the Perpendicular, and the Parallel
Openings, respectively (see Diagram 49).
Let's examine each of these three basic vari-
ations in turn.

The Diagonal Opening. For most of the
1970's and into the 1980's, the Diagonal
Opening was by far the most preferred
among experts in the U.S. (as well as in Ja-
pan — the country that has won more World
Championships than all other countries com-
bined!). The position after the most common
sequence for the first four moves (1. c4, 2.
c3, 3. d3, 4. c5) is shown in Diagram 50.
This is a critical point in this opening, in that
Black now has 9 squares from which to
choose (In fact, it is this mobility for Black
that has led many players to abandon this
opening as White). The most common con-
tinuation for Black at move 5 is d6, typically
followed by 6. f4, 7. £5 (see resulting posi-
tion in Diagram 51). Common further con-
tinuations include 8. e6, 9. c6, 10. d7 (Maru-
oka Opening); 8. d2, 9. g4, 10. d7
(sometimes called the Tanida Opening). An-
other variation after 5. d6 is: 6. e3 (called the
"chimney" because of the resulting position,
seen inverted in Diagram 52), typically fol-
lowed by 7. £5, 8. c6. Despite's White's over-
whelming disc majority after move 6. e3, ex-
perience has shown this to be a viable
opening. Of the other variations at move 5,
the most common are 5. b4 (Heath Opening;
see Point #16) and 5. f6 (which typically de-
velops into 6. e3, 7. c6, 8. d6, 9. e6; also see
Diagram 47). Recently, 5. b3 has also be-
come popular, typically followed by either
6. £4, 7. b5, 8. b4 or 6. €3, 7. dé.

The Perpendicular Opening. This has
been the most popular opening in the U.S. in
recent years — though the diagonal opening
now seems to be gaining favor again. The
most common first 6 moves are 1. c4, 2. 63,
3. f4, 4. c5, 5. d6, 6. £3 (see resulting posi-
tion in Diagram 53). Common continuations
are 7. d3, 8. b4 or 8. c2 (Inoue Opening) and
7. e6, 8. c3, 9. d3, 10. e2 (Rose Opening).
Other perpendicular variations include tak-
ing e6 at move 6 (Mimura Opening; typical-
ly followed by 7. d3 or 7. c6) or taking f6 at
move 3 (most often followed by 4. e6, 5. £5,
6. c5). Recently 3. £5 is also popular and is
typically followed by 4. e6 with 5. f6, 5. f4,
or 5. d3 all possible continuations.

Othello: Brief & Basic
The Parallel Opening. This opening is
rarely seen in tournament play and 1s consid-
ered to be an inferior opening. It is difficult to
prove why this opening doesn't work well for
White, but experience has shown that it
doesn't. A typical continuation would be 3.
d6, 4. e3, 5. c6, 6. b4. (Note that Black usual-
ly has the option, which he should probably
not take, of moving so as to create a Diagonal
Opening position -- e.g. 3. d6, 4. c3, 5. d3).

You have only limited control over the di-
rection of the opening because of the uncer-
tainty of what your opponent may do. A good
player must be prepared to defend against
most of the openings his opponent is likely to
use. But beyond this, how do you decide
which of the recommended openings to play
and which to avoid (if possible)? There is no
easy answer to this. Different openings lend
themselves to different styles of play; often
the best opening for you is the one that
"feels" the most comfortable. Alternatively,
you may choose to study a particular opening
and then use it simply because you know it so
well.

Finally, all this doesn't mean that there 1s
no way to understand what makes a good vs.
a bad opening move (other than trial-and-
error). There is the important principle of the
"quiet move," our next point!

15. The Opening: Quiet Moves

In the game of billiards, a player some-
times finds himself without a viable shot at
getting a ball in a pocket. In such cases, the
player often will attempt a shot that disturbs
the table as little as possible. The idea is to
leave his opponent with the same poor posi-
tion. This is actually quite similar to the ma-
jor goal of the opening phase of Othello.
Players frequently find themselves in the po-
sition that anything they do only make their
position worse. Their ideal move would be to
pass, but they can't. So they attempt to "dis-
turb" the board as little as possible, typically
by trying to flip only one disc, preferably an
interior one. These types of moves are called
quiet moves.

Othello expert Arnold Kling has gone one
step further and defined the "perfectly quiet
move" (PQM): a move that creates only one
new frontier (1.e. perimeter) disc — the one
used to make the move. An example of a

Othello: Brief & Basic



oOo -— mm Oo & HW

Diagram 52: Black to move
fan "inverted" chimney)


@OCe

OO®@

oO —) om (nh & Ww

Diagram 33; Black to move


ee >

oOo “a om OM & tw bo

Diagram 34: Black to mowe

oOo -— om UW & fH hh

oOo -— mm Oh & Wo hd


h PQM is the move to d3 in Diagram 54. It is
the only PQM that Black currently has avail-
able. PQMs help to keep your frontier disc
count low as well as keep your discs com-
pact and centrally located (both desirable

() goals as the opening progresses). The major-

ity of moves in most openings can be under-
stood in terms of taking a PQM, setting up to
take a PQM (set-up or offensive move), or
blocking your opponent from taking a PQM
(block or defensive move).

Examples of both a set-up and a block are
in Diagram 55. Here a Black move to d3
sets-up a PQM to f5 on Black's next turn.
White may block this by going to c2 (deny-
ing Black access to f5). Black is likely to
Diagram 55: Black to move continue with still another set-up to d2, re-

establishing access to f5. Another type of

set-up is possible in Diagram 54: note that f6

abe de would be a PQM for Black if the White disc

at e6 was Black. Black can accomplish this

by going to d7, for example, setting up a

POM at f6 for his next turn (which White

might try temporarily to block by going to

c3!). PQMs are so powerful that moves that

would normally not be desirable become

good if they can set-up or block a PQM. For

example, in Diagram 56, a White move 18 to

e6 is preferable to 18. £3, because the f3

move allows Black to continue with 19. e6 (a

PQM). Similarly, after 18. e6, Black may

C) continue with 19. dl, a move whose major

virtue is that it sets-up a PQM at b6. To

block this PQM, White is likely to follow

Diagram 56: White to move with a4 (poisoning the b6 move). One further

implication of all this is that you should al-

most always avoid moves that create a PQM

for your opponent where one previously did not exist. Otherwise you give your oppo-

nent a very easy decision for his next move (i.e. a reflex move): he takes the PQM!

(Note the similarity of all these principles to the more general discussion of blocking
techniques covered in Point #11).

Not all opening moves revolve around PQMs. An opening move may be desirable
because it cuts across the center and re-establishes a compact central cluster of discs
(perhaps leaving the opponent scattered about the frontier as well). Such moves may be
advised even though they typically flip more discs than conventional evaporation strate-
gy would recommend (e.g. checkerboarding, as discussed in Point #13). Also moves
that just flip one or two frontier discs (typically called waiting moves) are occasionally
desirable. For example, note moves 8, 9, and 10 of the Tanida Opening (see Diagram
51). These moves can be good because they generally avoid setting-up PQMs for your
opponent and may initiate a process of running your opponent out of moves. However,
they risk interfering with getting control of the center and may even help your opponent
to do so (see also Points #13 and #16 for more on these topics).

Finally, a comment on two commonly held beliefs about openings: 1) Black has the
advantage in the opening. This is difficult to prove, but seems to be true. In particular,
all other things equal, Black seems to have an easier time maintaining control of the
center and a lower disc count than does White. 2) You should not move out of the

, Je)




Othello: Brief & Basic
"sweet sixteen" (the central sixteen squares) until forced to do so. This is not sound ad-
vice. While an attempt to control the center often results in most initial moves staying
within the sweet sixteen, there are many cases when an early move towards the edge
works very well (e.g. the Heath Opening mentioned in Points #14 & #16 is an exam-

ple).
16. Midgame Strategy: Patterns

We have already discussed a great deal about midgame strategy. Evaporation, unbal-
anced edges, tempo gains etc. all have their greatest relevance in the midgame. Howev-
er, in an actual game, it may not always be easy to apply these principles. Once again,
we return to the issue of how to determine a "good move." In many cases, a global view
of the midgame can assist in your decision making. This can be best achieved by view-
ing the board position as one of several possible patterns. Not all midgames will fit one
of these patterns, but many of them will. Some patterns are "even" — others are one-
sided. In either case, recognizing the pattern can be a guide as to what move to make
next. But be especially careful: these patterns are transient! One or two moves can
transform the board from one type of pattern to another. In fact, the major goal of cer-
tain moves may be to effect a change to a more favorable pattern.

The Sandwich. This describes a pattern
where one player's pieces are surrounded on
two sides by opponent's pieces (see Dia- 1
gram 57). This is a one-sided position: the
player with the inside position (Black in Di-
agram 57) is generally considered to be
ahead. If he can get White to surround him
on more than two sides, he will be firmly in
control of the game and on his way to forc-
ing a win. In Diagram 57, Black is likely to
take the PQM at b6, maintaining the sand-
wich. Typically, White's best strategy here
is to make waiting type moves, squeezing
out every last option for a move, hoping to
force Black out of the sandwich before the
situation becomes hopeless. In this case,
White may go to b3, which leaves Black  Uiagram 37: Black to move
without an obvious next move. Note that
White would be in much worse shape if it
was his turn in Diagram 57, since any move ab cd ie f g_ih
only further erodes his position. Of course,
against a good player, don't expect to find
yourself on the inside of a sandwich too of-
ten. The next two patterns will occur far
more often.



eee i Oe)
oe i Seer
oe je Xe,
QOCee@ocr

Oo a om th & Wo hy

The X Pattern. Here, each player's piec-
es are located along a diagonal stripe, so
that the overall position resembles an X
(with each player having one line of the X)
(see Diagram 58). This is an even position,
so each player will generally attempt to
maintain the X, hoping to force the other
player into a move that erodes the position.
Most "maintenance" moves in this position
involve flipping the interior central pieces



Diagram 30; White to move

oOo a mm Om & WH

Othello: Brief & Basic 27
Oo a om Ch & Wo ho

Oo a om UO fF Wo ht


back and forth, and only minimally disturbing the periphery. Aside from such moves
being good from a general perspective (e.g. avoiding walls, flipping few frontier discs
etc.), bisecting your opponent's pieces tends to shift the X position towards a favorable
sandwich position. The opponent must do his best to counteract this on his next turn.
Thus (in Diagram 58) White is liklely to go to g6, while Black is likely to continue with
c7. If neither player gets a clear advantage, the outcome will be decided in the endgame,
after the edges start to fill up (and the X-pattern typically begins to look more like a
cross pattern).

[A slight digression: White might possibly choose to go to c7 rather than g6, taking
away Black's expected c7 response. This would pressure Black to consider a move to
d1, blocking (at least temporarily) White's ability to take g6 on his next move. This rap-
idly develops into a very different type of game than if White had started with g6.]

The Double Wall. Despite the admonition against forming walls, a wall can be de-
sirable if it pressures your opponent to form one as well. This leads to a double wall (Di-
agram 59). This is generally an even position, at least as long as the double wall is main-
tained. The goal, of course, is to get your opponent to break across and erode your wall
before you must do so to his wall. This typically requires making waiting type moves
(using up as few options as possible with each move), creating an ever more extensive

wall as you do so. Thus, White may go to e7,
h with Black continuing to e8 (not f8, which
allows a d8 response by White), each player
moving so as to extend his own wall.

The risk here is that, if you fail in your
goal, you may quickly find yourself in a
hopeless position. So sometimes, if you can
perceive that you will lose the double wall
battle, it pays to cut across your opponent's
wall immediately. Typically, you would try
to cut through the wall in a way that mini-
mizes your opponent's gain in options, while
attempting to shift towards a favorable sand-
wich position. Thus, after White e7, a Black
move to g3 has considerable merit: the only
new safe move it gives White is h4.

. . In contrast, an isolated piece behind your
Diagram 59: White to move opponent's side of a double wall, more typi-
cally will create trouble for you. It tends to
poison otherwise good moves, and may pro-
vide your opponent with an important op-
tion, when all others have disappeared.
Therefore, good players typically avoid flip-
ping such isolated discs unless no other vi-
able moves remain (or unless doing so forces
your opponent into making a even poorer
move). For example, imagine White moved
to b4 in Diagram 59, to which Black fol-
lowed with b3 (resulting position in Diagram
60). This was not a desirable way for White
to break across Black's wall. The isolated
White disc at b4 now poisons White's poten-
tial e7 move (c5 and d6 would get flipped),
as well as providing Black with a guaranteed
safe move whenever he needs it. Finally,
Diagram 60: White to move Black's potential g3 response seems even

stronger here, shifting the pattern more to-

4a ob qd so«6


i 1)


eeeee0@:
eeeeeee,




QOOOOCIOI


Othello: Brief & Basic
wards a sandwich pattern. a boc doef g oh

The Edge Double Wall. This is a special 1
pattern that seems to contradict much of the
conventional wisdom of Othello. In particu-
lar, one player (called the initiating player)
typically gives up control of the center, go-
ing to the edge early and often. The result is
frequently a sort of double wall, except one
player (the initiator of the pattern) typically
has his wall along two edges, while the op-
ponent's pieces are all in the interior of the
board (see Diagram 61). In such a position, ry
the player with the edge pieces is said to try
to "creep along the edge" (i.c. take a series ry  )
of contiguous edge moves while keeping his
opponent off the edges; also see Diagram Diagram 61: Blac
11). If successful, the initiating player soon
runs the opponent out of safe moves (.e. op-
tions are being limited by the fact that you
can't flip past an edge), and the opponent will
be forced to concede a corner. Thus, in Dia- 1
gram 61, Black goes to h7, leaving White
with only one safe move at c7. Black then
continues with c8, and White is forced to
concede a comer (and probably the game).

However, this "creeping" strategy carries
extreme risks: if the opponent can hold on,
without running out of options, until the mid-
game (or even later), the initiating player's
long edge walls and lack of central discs will
collapse on him as his opponent's more con-
ventional advantages finally turn the tide.
Thus, in Diagram 62, Black failed in his
edge double wall attempt. He must now start
making moves across White's wall, giving Diagram 62: Black to move
White new safe moves, and greatly deterio-
rating Black's position. As alluded to in
Points #14 and #15, the Heath opening (because of its early exit from the sweet six-
teen) is noted for Black initiating an edge double wall.



eo | we
Lee ee

oOo -— mm Oo & HW

to move


Oo som th f& WwW hi

Checkerboards. Though checkerboarding patterns (see Point #13) are most fre-
quently seen in the opening, they may occasionally persist to the midgame. Here, the in-
itiating player is usually the one who attempts to keep the opponent scattered around the
periphery (checkerboarded). Ironically, in the midgame, it is typically the initiator who
will go on to lose the game. This is because it is usually too difficult to force the check-
erboarded player into a game-losing move before the initiator's position hopelessly de-
teriorates. Thus, the midgame checkerboard is usually reserved for desperate positions,
where all other options seem even worse.

In summary, while all these patterns hold true to many of the basic concepts of
Othello strategy discussed previously, the exact subgoals can vary dramatically from
pattern to pattern. In addition, within a pattern, the correct subgoal may vary depending
upon whether you are on the offensive (e.g. initiator) or defensive side of the pattern.
Knowing how to handle each type of pattern is critical to successful midgame play.

Othello: Brief & Basic 29
Summary & Preview

The previous sections covered material ranging from the most basic principles of con-

trol, mobility, and corner sacrifices — to discussions of tempo and access -- to finally an ex-
amination of strategy specific to the opening and midgame. The next sections now tackle
some of the most difficult topics in all of Othello: endgame and edge play. These areas,
while building upon the general principles we have already developed, require an under-
standing of some new concepts that are specific to these particular phases of the game. Un-
avoidably, the material to follow tends to be more technical than i most of the previous
sections. While the level of explanation hopefully remains basic, the principles discussed
are more advanced. The importance of setting up the diagrams on a board 1s, if possible,
even greater here than in previous parts.

Oo a om Of & Wo bh


17. The Endgame: The Final Count

Previous sections have emphasized the principle of evaporation: how the best move
of the game is often the one that flips the least amount of discs (see Points #1-#5 for re-
view). But clearly, this has to come to an end at some point - after all the objective of

Othello is to finish the game with the most

fa h amount of discs. So now, we have arrived at
our discussion of the endgame. Clearly, with
OW only a few moves left, now is the time to go
for broke and flip as many discs as you can,

 S right? Well, it's almost right. The idea is not
necessarily to flip the most amount of discs
on each turn, but to flip the most amount of
discs relative to your opponent. The differ-
ence can be seen in Diagram 63. Here it is
Black to play at move 59. The move to the
h1 corner flips 8 discs while the alternative
move to h2 only flips 2 discs. But even at
this late stage of the game, assuming that
this makes hl the better move for Black

eco) oe
OOOO ee Nine uke meet mn Ar

Diagram 63: Black to move ter hl, White goes to h2, flipping 10 discs
and winning the game 33-31. If Black had
gone to h2 mstead of hl, White then takes

h1, flipping only 1 disc, and Black wins 34-30. Clearly what is needed is an ability to

count the position: determine the net gain or loss of discs for all the remaining possible
sequence of moves.

There are many possible ways to count discs, and even the experts disagree as to the
best way. Here, I will present one method of counting that could have guided you to the
best move in Diagram 63. Consider first the hl move: Black flips eight discs (+8) and in
addition places down 1 new disc (+1) for a gain of +9 (1.e. 8 +1). White continues by
flipping 10 black discs back to white for a loss (for Black) of —10. The result is (+9) + GC
10) = -1, or a net loss of 1 disc for Black. Compare this to the result if Black takes h2
first: Now Black flips 2 discs plus adds a new disc to the board (+3), while White flips
only 1 black disc when he goes to h1 (-1) for a net result of (+3) + 1) = +2. Since +2 is
a better final result than —1, then h2 is a better move for Black than h1.

Clearly, with more moves remaining (and with more choices at each move and discs
possibly getting flipped back and forth several times before the game is over), determin-
ing the best move by counting can be extremely difficult, if not impossible. This 1s what
makes the endgame such a humbling experience for human Othello players. Computers
are typically capable of taking a position anywhere from up to 16 moves from the end




eVlee@Ve”|

. 12

eeeeeooe:-
QO@CO@ eC!

Othello: Brief & Basic
of the game, analyzing all possible permutations in a relatively brief amount of time, de-
termining all final disc counts, and picking the move that guarantees the highest possi-
ble disc count against best possible play (.e. the perfect play sequence). Essentially,
the computer is no longer using any of the heuristic strategies 1t must employ earlier in
the game. It simply uses the final disc count to determine its best move. If humans could
do this as well (in the time constraints of a tournament and without being permitted to
write down anything!) then this would be the recommended strategy for human players.
But humans can rarely count out a game with more than 5 moves left, and even then the
count is usually incomplete, limited only to those sequences the player thinks are most
likely to occur. So, we humans have to rely on strategic generalizations to help us
through most of the endgame (see also Point #18). But, whenever feasible, counting
should be attempted.

For example, in Diagram 64, though there are just three moves left, only careful
counting is likely to reveal the best move. The current score is Black(35)—White(26).
White can choose from any of the three remaining squares for his next move. Taking
the hl corner immediately may initially seem attractive. Indeed, if Black follows with
h2, White goes to g1 and wins 34-30 (e.g. +3-3+8 = +8). But h2 is not Black's best re-
sponse and White should not count on Black going there. If Black goes to g1 instead,
White finishes with h2 and loses 31-33 (+3-—
5+7 = +5). If White chooses h2 initially,
Black must pass. White's best continuation
turns out to be g1(!), but after Black finishes
with h1, it still only nets White a tie (+6+7-7
= +6). Only an initial move to g1 guarantees
a win for White. Black's best response is h1,
leaving h2 for White and a 33-31 win (+7—
7+7 = +7). In this case, where strategic gen-
eralizations offered little help, correct count-
ing was critical: it meant the difference be-
tween victory and defeat.

Of course, in many endgame positions,
especially by the time you get to the last 3
moves, your best move (or at least a sure
winning move) will be self-evident. Count-
ing is not absolutely necessary in these cas-
es. Similarly, some possible sequences are
so obviously foolish that we usually need
not consider (or count) them. Still, in close
games when the best move is not obvious, or
anytime when you need to be certain of the
final result, there is no substitute for an accu-
rate count.

Sometimes, even an approximate count
can indicate the correct choice of moves. For
example, in Diagram 65, Black's two choic-
es seen approximately equal at first glance.
In both cases, Black flips just one disc (b2)
and White's final move flips 5 edge discs.
Therefore, determining the better move will
depend entirely on the number of interior
discs White flips. If Black takes b1, then
White-a2 flips only 3 interior discs (b2, b3,
and c2). If Black instead takes a2, White-b1
flips more than 3 interior discs (6 discs to be
precise: b2, b3, c2, d3, e4, and f5). Thus,
even without an exact count, it becomes

Oo som th & Wo hi

oOo a mm Om & WH

Diagram 65: Black to mow


Othello: Brief & Basic 31
cod ef q

eeoee
QO@O
QO@O
eeeee
eeeee
QOOOOO

Diagram 66: Black to move

oOo -— om UW & fH hh

cr 39)
jeeeorno
leeneee
eo ee
i esese
jeooeee

Diagram 67

6 el 1S



SPO @OOIO|
“100 O00”:


OOO OOOO
2@CIOOOOOIC





clear that b1 is Black's better move. In fact,
after b1, Black wins 33-31, while after a2,
Black loses 30-34.

Interior Sweeps. Another endgame tech-
nique, closely related to counting, often oc-
curs after one player has already clearly won
the game. It is now mostly a case of how to
maximize the final disc count. If there are
too many moves remaining for a thorough
count, players may still take advantage of
opportunities for "interior sweeps." While
complete coverage of the details of this tech-
nique are beyond the scope of this Hand-
book, we will show three (hopefully instruc-
tive) examples of the basic principle. In
Diagram 66, with correct play, Black can
systematically sweep White off the board
and achieve a 64-0 victory. Black's goals are
twofold: develop solid "masses" of stable
discs while continuing to minimize White's
options. Black's initial move should be to d2;
White is then forced to respond with b1, and
play continues with: a1, pass; c2, c3; b3, b2;
a2, a3; c4, b4; a4, pass; c5, b5; a5, pass; b6,
pass; b7, a6; a7, pass; a8. Play out this se-
quence yourself, and note especially how the
exact sequence of the first few moves is criti-
cal to accomplish the necessary move limita-
tion. For example, playing a8, instead of d2,
for the first move will result in later moves
flipping unwanted discs, opening up new
choices for White and preventing the "wipe-
out."

Not all interior sweeps lead to "wipe-out"
victories. In some cases, an effective interior
sweep can even be accomplished by sacrific-
ing a corner (and perhaps an adjacent edge
as well). In fact, in these next two examples,
Black sacrifices a corner in preference to
taking it! These sequences reveal a elegance
in strategy that contrasts to the often effec-
tive but "brute force" approach of taking the
comer. Thus, in Diagram 67, note how
Black's moves 39 and 41 cleared White al-
most entirely out of the western half of the
board, creating a mass of stable discs in that
area that virtually assured victory, despite
the sacrifice of the h8 comer. Finally, in Dia-
gram 68, we see an elegant example of an in-
terior sweep that begins with Black passing
up the opportunity to take the h8 corner and
instead conceding it to White at move 47. By
move 50, we can begin to see the beauty of
this move, as Black sweeps from west to east
across the board. The final sequence of this

Othello: Brief & Basic
game was: g6, 25; h5, h4; 94, 93; h3, h2; hl,
pass; g2. White gets the entire East edge
from h2 to h8, but still loses 51-13. Though
these interior sweeps are not typically ac-
companied by complete counting of the po-
sition, limited counting is required to see
when a sacrifice of a corner is to be preferred
and/or how best to approach the disc maxim-
ization attempt.


18. The Endgame: Counting on
More than Just Counting

CO @O)
For most of the endgame (which techni- rites



OOO COO

cally includes the last 20 or so moves of the
game) counting alone will not be feasible (at eeee
least not for humans). At these times, the Diagram 69: Black to move

major strategies and tactics developed for
other parts of the game can often be applied
here as well. For example, the previously de-
veloped ideas of going to odd-numbered re-
gions of the board, delaying the taking of
free moves, and taking advantage of an op-
ponent's lack of access to a square (see
Points #9-#11), are all evident in Diagram
69. Thus, to a novice player, it may seem
like b1 is Black's best move, setting up to
take the h1 corner. In actuality, it is a losing
move if White follows with g2. Black's best
move is g2 (going into the odd-numbered re-
gion, even though it sacrifices the h1 corner


eeoeeeOe

eoeoo
eeeo0
eoee”)

eee o@-
0000 e-

to White). Black can afford to delay going to
b1 because White has no access to it. The re-
sultis that Black will now (with proper play)
get the last move in each remaining unfilled

regions and win the game. Diagram 70: White to move
There are also some tactics to be consid-

oO a mh OF fF W he =

ered that are relatively specific to the end-
game. Probably the most important of these
is "feeding your opponent." The idea is il-
lustrated in Diagram 70. Here, White would
like to get the last move in the a8 corner re-
gion. Going to f8 doesn't work since Black is
then left with no moves and must pass.
White must then initiate an unfavorable ex-
change of moves in the even-numbered a8
region. Going directly into the a8 region and
saving the f8 move for last doesn't really
change the result. The correct sequence is
for White to begin with a7. Now, whatever
Black's response, White continues with f8.
Black now is forced to take a move in the a8
region, giving White a great final move
there. The idea was to "feed" Black a self-
destructive move in the a8 region prior to
taking f8. A similar idea is seen in Diagram

e000 ~
Jes)
eo (ee
oe J

1: White to move


eeo0e 00:
elves .

60600060 -

Oo a mh Oh & WH hm


Diagram

Othello: Brief & Basic 33





Oo a om Of & Wh =


@OOCe®e
OOOO
OOOO
OO l0e@
| OOOS8C eS
@ Oovee
QOOWICIO

Diagram 72: Black to move

Ot 1S

. OO Kt Sh
eOvUCC eee


3: White to move


71, even though the remaining region is an
odd-numbered one. Here it would be a mis-
take to take h8 initially, since Black is left
with no moves, forcing White to go again
and giving Black the crucial last move. Far
better is to go to h7 initially, feeding Black
the g7 move. Now White finishes the game
with h8 and wins!

Probably the best overall advice for end-
game play is "expect the unexpected." Even
experts are frequently frustrated as they
watch "sure winning positions" disappear
due to some unforeseen lack of access or
similar problem. Players need to be on guard
for the hidden dangers and/or opportunities
that may exist in a given position. For now, I
offer five representative examples (by no
means comprehensive) of what may await
an unsuspecting Othello player. See if you
can find the best move or sequence of
moves in each case before reading further.

The first two Diagrams both involve unu-
sual aspects of the main diagonal (see also
Point #8). In Diagram 72, al would be a
mistake since it allows White to continue
with bl, thereby gaining undeniable access
to the h8 comer. The best move is b1(‘), ex-
tending Black's control of the main diago-
nal. White's position now crumbles as he is
forced to choose between g1 or h7. In Dia-
gram 73, White's control of the al-h8 main
diagonal unexpectedly winds up costing
him the game. White wants to get 2 of the 3
remaining moves in the al corner region and
so begins by going to b1. Black continues
with al, but since Black has no discs on the
main diagonal, b2 does not get flipped. This
prevents White from gaining access to a2,
forcing White to go to g8. Black now gets
both a2 and h8 and wins the game. (Note:
even if White had begun with g8, he still
would have lost.)

Sometimes, the best move is so counter-
intuitive, or so seems to violate established
principles, that it is very difficult to find it.
Thus, m Diagram 74, Black wants to get 2 of
the three moves in the a8 comer region and
would even being willing to give up the a8
corner to do so. The move to b8 fails, since
after White takes a8, Black does not have ac-
cess to b7. Similarly, the move to b7 fails,
since White can now balance the South edge
by taking b8 without giving Black access to
a8. Black's best move turns out to be the
seemingly suicidal move to b2, conceding
White the North and West edges. But after

Othello: Brief & Basic
White continues with the semi-forced move

to al, Black can now go to b7 without allow-
ing White to balance the South edge. The 1
perfect play final sequence 1s g2-h1-b8-a8-
pass-h8-pass-g7 resulting in a 40-24 win for
Black! (Note the general idea of how a move
in one area of the board — the al area — had
a critical effect on another, seemingly unre-
lated area of the board - the a8 area.)

In the most extreme cases, conceptual
analysis appears to be essentially useless,
while only a computer would seem to be
able find the correct path by counting. Thus, oe
in Diagram 75, Black made the reasonable
move to a8. Unfortunately, it is also a losing i?
move (assuming subsequent perfect play).

The winning move was h7(!), even though Diagram 75: Black to mowe
this sacrifices the al comer, as well as the
West and North edges. In trying to make
some sense of this difficult position, note
that a disadvantage of a Black move to a8is_
that White can then get the last move in that
region by taking the likely stable wedge at
b8. [Note: With perfect play, Black wins 36-
27 after h7 (h7-al-b2-f8-h2-b8-a8-c1-g8;
neither player gets h1!) but loses 31-33 after
a8 (a8-b8-h7-g8-f8-c 1-h1-h2-b2-a1).]

Fortunately, not all positions are that ex-
treme. Even if the correct move is initially
counter-intuitive, some careful analysis
along with some counting (if possible) will
often uncover the best attack. Thus in Dia- ®
gram 76, it may seem like a8 1s White's best
move, going into the odd-numbered remain-
ing region in preference to the even- [Jj agram To: W
numbered h8 region. However, it turns out
the a8 is a losing move. The only winning
move is g8(!) leading to a 33-31 win for White after the following perfect play se-
quence: h7-a8-b8-a7. The major problem is that if White takes a8 initially, Black goes
to b8. Now White cannot safely continue with a7 or the entire 7th row will become
White, giving Black both h7 and g8 and the game. So White must continue with g8 in-
stead, Black follows with h7, with White finally going to a7. But, despite the similarity
of this sequence to the winning one, it results in a 33-31 loss for White. An attempt to
count out the net gain after each of these two most likely sequences would reveal the ad-
vantage of g8 over a8.




jee)
OOO}



Cleee@ Vee. -
ee eee

Oo om th f& WM bi




ite to play




Cleee@Oee-
CeC@eeee.-


oO aS om Of & Wh


19. Edge Play: General Concepts & Initiating Edges

General Concepts. As the end of the opening phase of Othello approaches, the
players are inevitably presented with the decision as to whether or not to occupy an
edge square. This raises one of the more complex issues in all of Othello. These next
two sections present some useful general guidelines for dealing with this issue.

As discussed earlier (see Points #1 - #5), players unaware of move limitation strate-
gy often feel its best to take edge squares as soon and as often as possible. While it's true
that ultimate possession of at least some edge squares is usually necessary to win, this
"rush to the edge" concept has been clearly discredited. In fact, some expert players

Othello: Brief & Basic 35
Oo —- om th f& WwW hi

Oo a om UO fF Wo ht


believe it is best to avoid taking edge squares for as long as it is feasible. By this view,
edge square moves tend to become liabilities later in the game (by poisoning otherwise
good moves etc.). Personally, I would advise against either extreme. Indeed, edge
square moves do have at least one distinct advantage: there are less ways to flip an edge
piece than a interior piece. Thus, the proper and judicious use of edge moves may help
promote move limitation. Also, once your opponent has gone to an edge, a move to that
edge often becomes much more desirable for you. Finally, recall that we have previous-
ly discussed a special tempo-gaining edge technique: "creeping along the edge" (see
Points #5 & #16).

For simplicity, our discussions will usually focus only on one edge at a time, in rela-
tive isolation from the rest of the board. But be aware that, in a real game, edge moves
must be evaluated using general principles and in the context of the entire board - the in-
terior area as well as the other three edges. For example, in Diagram 77, Black decides
to take the edge move to a4. The major rationale for this decision was not any special at-
tribute of the west edge, but the fact that, by flipping c4, it set up a Perfectly Quiet
Move (see Point #15) to e6. An edge move to a3 or a5, or almost any other non-edge
move would not have accomplished this. In other cases, edge move choices may be pri-
marily dictated by the number of non-edge discs flipped (e.g. Diagram 77 as well as Di-
agrams 7,8 & 9 in Point #3).

There are two major goals, beyond the

a booed oe f 9g oh general ones of move limitation strategy, to
bear in mind when deciding to go to an edge
(prior to comers being occupied): 1. Try to
be the last player able to take a safe move
along the edge (e.g. gain a tempo along the
edge). Similarly, try to get more of the
moves along an edge than your opponent.
2. Try to obtain a desirable final edge posi-
tion or force your opponent to take an unde-
sirable one (e.g. an unbalanced edge). These
two points will be the focus of much of the
subsequent discussion. Often these two con-
cepts, tempo vs. position, will be in conflict
(e.g. a move that gains a tempo will sacrifice
the positional advantage). A major decision
will be how best to resolve this conflict.


Lk 1S

See |


Diagram TT

Initiating an Edge. The player who first

moves to an edge is said to initiate the edge.

aoboocid ¢ f g sh In this section, we will focus on some of the
edge-specific factors (as opposed to the
more general considerations) that help to de-
termine when to occupy an edge square. As
a general rule, it is a poor choice to initiate
an edge by going to a C-square (see Point
#6). But assuming a choice, how does a
player decide when an edge move is advisa-
ble, and which edge square move (among
the available A and B squares) is the best?
Here, the decision must involve looking at
least a little beyond the edge. For example,
in Diagram 78, White considers a move to
the cl A-square. This is probably a poor
choice since it flips both c2 and d2, totally
Diagram 76 shutting White off from any subsequent
moves to the North edge. Contrast this with

ee@OVCe

. 1282
‘S| 12

eeOe

Othello: Brief & Basic
the move to the h6 A-square. Here, the move flips g5 but not g6 (because the sixth
row is all Black). White still retains access to h7 (which could be critical in avoiding an
unbalanced edge later) as well as continued access to h3 or h4. Finally, if White felt it
was important to move to the North edge, d1 (a B-square) would probably be preferable
to cl (since d1 flips only the d2 non-edge disc). Which 1s the best choice? Sorry, but
there's no clear answer here (especially given this limited analysis). In fact, it isn't even
clear that an edge move 1s called for here: many experts might choose b5 as the best
move. This is because, since Black does not have access to b6, White's move to b5 does
not open up any obviously good moves for Black. The pressure is now on Black. It's be-
cause even experts disagree about the best move in positions like this that each Othello
game tums out differently.

Another example (Diagram 79) presents a less ambiguous set of choices. It is White
to play. Note the relative advantages of a move to a6 vs. h6. The a6 move allows an
easy a4 response for Black. White has gained nothing: neither a tempo nor a positional
advantage. In contrast, the h6 move looks much better: Black cannot respond with hé4. If
Black responds with h5, White continues with h4 (gaining a tempo at very little cost po-
sitionally). In either case, Black is now forced to move to the North edge, leading to a
weakening of his position.

[A slight digression: One guide in choos-
ing from among alternative edge moves (as
always!) is anticipating your opponent's best abe ge
response and your subsequent response to it
(i.e. planning ahead!). Thus, returning to Di-
agram 77 for the moment, we note a previ-
ously unmentioned advantage of Black's
move to a4: it maintains a tempo advantage
along the West edge for Black. That is,
White's only possible West edge responses
to a4 are to the adjacent squares of a3 or a5
(in this case, White doesn't even have access
to a5). In either case, Black could flip the
White disc on his next turn (e.g. White - a3;
Black - a2), leaving White with no more
moves along the edge. However, Black's a4
move also has its problems: by flipping three
interior discs (b4, c4 and d4) it reduces Diagram 79: White to play
Black's future mobility and may open up
new good moves for White. Also, if White
continues with 16. a3, Black has to choose between giving up the tempo or taking a
weak C-square move (a2) early in the game.

Black's move to a4 at move 15 is referred to as taking the edge "head-on." Contrast
this to the situation if Black had gone to a5 instead (taking the edge "diagonally" or
"slanted"). Now White can respond with a3 and Black will no longer gain a tempo. Ac-
tually, White might choose a4 in preference to a3. While this allows Black the tempo-
gaining continuation to a3, Black is unlikely to be in a hurry to take a3. The move has
the undesirable effect of flipping the discs at b4 and c5 as well as leading Black towards
a possible over-abundance of edge discs that may poison moves and be a mobility-
reducing liability later in the game. But if Black does not take a3, White can continue
with a6!

White's a3 (tempo) response to 15. a5 is sometimes referred to as the "American"
style of edge play while the a4 (positional) response is labelled the "European" style.
One cannot assume that either style is always to be preferred. Similarly, taking the edge
head-on (15. a4) seems preferable to the a5 choice for Black in this position (Diagram
77), though there are other positions when taking the edge diagonally would be pre-
ferred. ]



Ct ee

oOo -— mm Oh & TH

Othello: Brief & Basic 37
oOo a m@ mm & WH


So, what is more critical: gaining a tempo or avoiding a weak edge position? Taking
an edge or an interior square? Taking an edge head-on or slanted? Taking too many
edge squares or too little? Taking an edge square adjacent to an opponent's disc or away
from the opponent? We have seen that the answer to these questions is an unsatisfactory
one: It depends. This section detailed the issues relevant to making these decisions. Af-
ter this, experience will be the best teacher.

20. Edge play: Developing & Resolving Edges

Developing an Edge. Moves subsequent to the initial move to the edge are moves
that develop the edge. For most of this discussion, we will focus on what happens after
an initial White move to an A-square. Similar principles could be applied to an initial
move to a B-square. The discussion will also focus primarily on the decisions of the
player who initiated the edge (White in this case). At this point, Black will have three
basic choices (assuming access to the relevant squares): avoid the edge altogether, go to
a square adjacent to White's disc, or go to square non-adjacent to White's disc. By dis-
cussing the merits of White's responses to each of these type of moves, we will also de-
velop a feeling for the merits of Black's ini-
tial choice.
abe h In the first case, Black chooses to
C3 C3 avoid the edge after White's initiating move.
oO Oo oO White now has to decide whether to contin-

ue by developing the edge immediately or
CWC r C) not. Developing the edge has the advantage

of gaining a tempo, but may result in subse-
quent move limitation problems and/or
weak edge positions. Diagram 80 illustrates
some (by no means all) edge positions sub-
sequent to White's decision to develop edges
C that Black has avoided. Along the East edge
is a table pattern (White is in possession of
both A-squares and there are no other pieces
C3 C3 along the edge; see also Point #9). A table
has the advantage of being a secure edge:
Diagram 80: White to move while Black has safe moves available (h4 or
h5), taking one assures White an equally
safe response along the same edge (the re-
maining vacant B-square). However, this table is also disadvantageous in that it is a
closed edge to White: White has no access to any of the remaining vacant squares along
the edge (unless Black moves there first). In contrast, the table along the South edge 1s
not closed to White: since c7 and d7 are Black, White maintains considerable safe ac-
cess to the edge (i.e. it remains an open edge for White). The vacant square at f7 should
also be considered among the possible moves in this region: White can probably gain a
tempo by going there, but will lose all access to the h8 corner region by doing so. Final-
ly, note that White's North edge position has created a type of weakness referred to as a
hole (d1). White has no access to this square but Black can wedge in there with a free
move at any time he wishes. Though experts sometimes find it useful to create these
holes (typically to gain a necessary tempo), they should be avoided as a general rule.
The next three diagrams show some selected positions after Black has gone to an
edge initialized by White. In these diagrams, the edge decisions are simplified by the
fact that the 4 squares immediately interior to the A and B edge squares are all occu-
pied. Obviously, im actual games, this will not always be the case. In Diagram 81, there
are two edges where Black followed White's A-square moves by going to the adjacent
B-square. Along the North edge, White should probably not move to the edge at all.
Black currently has no access to e1, f1 or gl. Any move that White would make would


Othello: Brief & Basic
unfavorably change this (e.g. a move to el

closes the whole edge to White). White a_i
needn't worry about Black's potential move
to bl: it forms a dangerously weak "uneven
three" that White could exploit in various
ways later in the game (possibly setting up a
Stoner trap or making a semi-forcing move
to el, etc.). Along the East edge, rather than
leaving the edge alone, a move to h4 for
White seems attractive: since it doesn't flip
g4, White still retains access to h3. This
pressures Black to prevent the h3 move by
going to either h3 or h2. Once again, the de-
sirability of a type of move varies with the
overall board position!

Diagram 82 shows three situations after
Black has followed White's mitial A-square Diagram 1
moves by going to the non-adjacent B-
square. Itis typically a poor move for White
to continue by going to the remaining A-
square (e.g. f1 along the North edge), as this a_i
allows Black to wedge in at dl and safely,
gain the last move along the edge. An initial
White move to d1 would be better: it doesn't
flip e2 and thus leaves Black's mobility re-
stricted along the edge. On the East edge, an
h6 move shares similar problems with f1,
but h4 works out less well than does d1.
Along the South edge, there is a surprise: If
White goes to f8, Black will not have access
to the d8 square: Black will be forced to
choose between going to g8 (taking a rela-
tively weak C-square edge position) or let-
tng White take d8 on White's next tum
(thereby allowing White to gain a tempo,
though White will be closing off the edge if
he does)! It is usually a difficult no-win type
of decision for Black. White's move to f8
followed by Black's "unexpected" lack of
edge square access (to d8 in this case) is re-
ferred as an "edge trap". It is one of several
possible types of edge traps (two more ex-
amples are discussed in Diagram 84). These
traps can often have a critical influence on
the outcome of the game (e.g. see Pomt
#21).

Black's remaining major option, after
White's initial A-square move, is to go to the
opposite A-square. White then has to decide
whether to continue to develop the edge. In
Diagram 83, we see three of the more com-
mon edge patterns that can develop (they
may also develop from other initial posi-
tions). The North and East edges both show
a 3-disc edge pattern called a Boscov. Diagram 83
Though this position may remain unaltered


tan)


CO @eeOor
eC ee


Oo a om Of ff Wo ho

COO}
Cjeee

Oo a om Ch & Wo ht

oOo -s m Oo & WH

Othello: Brief & Basic 39
for many turns, eventually one player or the other typically goes to the remaining vacant
B-square (i.e. d1 or h4), challenging the opponent to take a C-square along that edge
(or lose a tempo). Note how, in this case, a Black move to d1 works out better than the
comparable move to h4. This is because if White continues to g1 along the North edge,
White is left with an unbalanced edge (White has no access to b1), while an h2 continu-
ation along the East could be followed by White balancing the edge at h7 (see Point #7
for more on unbalanced edges). An initial move to h4 also works out less well than d1
for White: 1t would flip the disc at g3 to White, permitting Black to follow with h7,
threatening to balance the edge by going to h2 on his next turn (but see the discussion of
Diagram 86). Given all this, | would probably recommend the player whose turn it is in
Diagram 83 to take d1 (before his opponent does)!

[Another slight digression: A variation on the basic Boscov pattern would be if the
Black disc at h5, in Diagram 83, was at h4 instead. A full discussion of the advantages
vs. disadvantages of these two variations is beyond the scope of this Handbook, though
they usually focus on issues such as which variation offers the better chance of getting
(or preventing the opponent from getting) a balanced edge (e.g. in the position shown in
the Diagram, a White move to h4 would flip g3 and f2, while in the variation position, a
White move to h5 results in a nearly identical East edge pattern but does not flip the g3

and f2 discs)]

4 e f gag oh Boscov decisions (e.g. whether to fill in

poe the vacant B-square or let your opponent do
AMO [O

it) are another example of the tempo vs. posi-
@oCe

tion decisions that an Othello player com-
eccee square is filled in, the players are typically
left with still another of these dilemmas.

monly faces along the edges. After the B-
Thus, along the West edge of Diagram 83,
White must decide whether to go to a7, gain-

ing a tempo at the expense of an unbalanced

edge, or leave the edge alone with the nsk
that Black might decide to gain a tempo by

going to a2. These decisions are made more
difficult by the need to simultaneously con-

oOo a m@ mm & WH

sider the relative merits of moves along all 4

eee edges (as well as any viable non-edge

Diagram &+-A moves). (Hey, nobody said becoming an
Othello expert would be easy!)

dt Next, in Diagram 8, we see two particu-

a bec def @aoh larly dramatic examples of edge traps. First,

note how after Black makes the seemingly
innocent move to f2, White can continue

with b1. This would normally be suicidal if
Black has access to the hole at e1. But in this

case, White can get a triple gain in tempo,
getting both el and g1 on subsequent turns.

This typically destroys the position of the un-

CIPA@O@OO suspecting Black player. Second, note that

eee ie Black actually has a much better move than

f2: h i d f hi b
O eee” going to | b&! Because White does not | have

OOOo® access to c8, Black will get both remaining

oOo -— mm Oh & HW

eeee moves along the South edge.
| Resolving an Edge. A resolved edge is


Diagram o4+-6 one where neither player can make any more
safe moves. Diagram 85 shows four of the

Othello: Brief & Basic
more common resolved edges: the unbal-
anced edge (East), the balanced edge
(South), the dual-unbalanced edge (West),
while the North edge is typically referred to
as an "even-four." Note that the North edge
would still be considered resolved even if
the disc(s) at dl and/or e1 were Black (i.e.
wedged in). The dual-unbalanced edge is a

| |OOCee
particularly interesting pattern and may lead 4 eeeece)
to each player attacking the other's position 5 C C ®@ C ®@ C)
via corner sacrifices (e.g. b2 for Black vs. b7

ini fe h fitabl
iake it first Some of these resolved edges 7 (|_| OHMIC
eee0

may not stay permanently resolved. Thus,
the even-four in Diagram 85 is a resolved

edge only because White cannot get access Diagram 65
to bl or gl. Similarly the East edge is re-
solved because Black does not have access
to h2. Safe access to these squares may be a ob


reestablished later in the game.

Is it a good idea to resolve an edge as_ 1
soon as you can, or should you leave it unre-
solved for a while, or even let your opponent
resolve it? As so often is the case, it depends.
Resolving an edge tends to simplify the
overall board position and (almost by defini-
tion) reduces the number of safe moves in
the region of the board in question. Whether
this is good or bad depends on the particular
board position, though most typically it is
the player who already has the lead that
gains the most immediate benefit from re-
solving an edge quickly (see also Point #13). C3

Sometimes a player will need to take .
"desperate" action to prevent an edge from Uiagram
being resolved by an opponent. Thus, in Dia-
gram 86, Black could go to h7, balancing the
East edge. But White would continue by goimg to b1, balancing the North edge. This
leaves Black in a losing position. So instead, Black should go to b2 immediately, pre-
venting White from safely balancing the North edge. Now it is Black that will win the
game. [A digression: Moves like Black's b2 move can sometimes block opponent's
from A-squares as well as C-squares, as would be the case if cl were vacant in Diagram
86.] This example serves as a convenient introduction to our next and last point.





ck to play


eeeees
Qe @OCeCr
et (Sees ep
WeCe@Vee.:


Oo a om Of & Wo ht



6: Bl


21. Decisive Moves and Prioritizing of Moves.

The previous 20 points have described a collection of rules, principles, generaliza-
tions, and guidelines for making intelligent decisions about what is the best move in any
particular Othello position. However, making such decisions in actual games requires
combining these ideas into an integrated overview. For example, in a given position,
there may be an unbalanced edge waiting to be balanced, an opponent's move waiting to
be poisoned, a potential tempo-gain by the opponent to try to prevent, and a safe move
to take before the opponent blocks it. Which of these valid concerns should take prece-
dence? What if attaining one goal actually interferes with another? This section discuss-
es two concepts that I believe are useful in solving these inevitable dilemmas.

Othello: Brief & Basic 41
ianeeCe

2 @@CO@O

jeeoue

ee { ee

‘gee?

@OCe Cr

20 \ ieee



Diagram 87: White to move



eees

210 (OOOO

eenooce

1@OCOC CO

5} OOOO
OOO @OO

CO! @e@



Diagram 66-6: After moves

41-45 (a5!-al-a?-a8-b2)


Decisive Moves. It often happens, espe-
cially between two players of about equal
skill, that the endgame arrives with neither
player having a clear path to victory. It may
be that a computer could show that one or
the other player has an undeniable win with
perfect play, but since neither player is like-
ly to play perfectly for the last 20 moves,
this may not be very relevant (though it of-
ten provides a very instructive after-the-
game analysis). Yet, at some point, a move
is made after which, barring any major blun-
ders, the outcome seems decided. This move
is called the decisive move (though occa-
sionally the critical nature of such a move
will not be apparent until looked at in retro-
spect one or two moves later). I realize this
is a subjective definition, since recognition
of a decisive move will depend upon a
player's overall Othello ability. But I still be-
lieve itis an instructive concept.

An example of this concept is in Dia-
gram 87. White has an opportunity to make
a decisive move. Before reading further, see
if you can find it. Ready? Okay. White
should go to al! Though this is a fairly obvi-
ous choice to Othello experts, less skilled
players (who have learned about the danger
of unbalanced edges) may be surprised. Af-
ter all, this move allows Black to follow by
taking the wedge at bl, gaining undeniable
access to h1 securing both the north and east
edges. Despite all this, after al-b1l-a7-h1-g2,
White gets the remaining 2 corners and
more than enough discs to win the game. In
contrast, if White takes the seemingly desir-
able quiet move to a7 (rather than a1 initial-
ly), it quickly leads to disaster. Black fol-
lows with g7, gaining control of the al-h8
main diagonal. Now White can no longer go
to al. He has missed his chance at a decisive
move, and is now set up to lose all four cor-
ners and the game. In essence, Black's g7
(rather than White's potential al) became
the decisive move of the game. [Note: A
similar situation existed in Diagram 86:
Black needed to recognize and take the deci-
sive move to b2 rather than the seemingly
safer (but losing) move to h7.] Note also
how a seemingly minor change in just one
disc can alter the position dramatically:
thus, if the disc at d4 in Diagram 87 were
White, a Black move to g7 would no longer
give Black control of the main diagonal.
White could now safely go to a7 (in prefer-
ence to the previously recommended a1)!

Othello: Brief & Basic
The point of all this is: Always be watching for decisive moves and when you find
one, take it immediately. Don't let the critical moment pass. Make sacrifices if neces-
sary. Look especially for bold unexpected moves that may seal a victory rather than
more conservative "safe" moves that leave the outcome still in doubt. Avoid the tempta-
tion to wait for a more favorable position or you may discover that your winning oppor-
tunity will disappear altogether.

My personal favorite for a decisive move is from a "postal Othello" game I played.
The critical position is shown in Diagram 88—A. I was Black and none of my possible
choices at move 41 seemed to lead to the clear-cut path to victory that I was seeking. Fi-
nally, I discovered a truly wonderful (and decisive) move: a5! Even though it sacrificed
the al corner, I knew I had the game won. After White predictably went to a1, I contin-
ued by going to a7, allowing White to take a second comer at a8(!). I then went to b2 at
move 45, leaving the position as shown in Diagram 88-B. The game was now "over":
White would be forced to concede the h1 corner and I had b1, b7, and b8 as free moves
whenever I wanted them!

Though "provable" decisive moves are a ob
limited to the endgame, moves that appear to
be decisive (1.e. that seem to be a pivotal
turning point in the game) can occur much
earlier, even in the opening phase. For exam-
ple, Diagram 89 is taken from a game I
played in the 1982 U.S. Nationals. I went to
cl at move 18 which set up an edge trap of
the sort described in Diagram 82 (i.e. Black
has no access to e1). In this case, Black has
even worse problems: if he chooses to go to
b1 (to avoid the loss of tempo), White could
continue with g2, setting up a Stoner trap
(see Point #8). Black therefore went to h3,
leaving White to take el at move 20. This
was the beginning of a deterioration that led
to Black decisively losing the game.

& hi





OL |OIO
kt OSs

Oo a mm Oh fF Wo ht

Diagram og

Prioritizing of Moves. Decisive moves are really a special case of a still more gen-
eral concept: how to "read the position" and prioritize the possible moves. That is,
how to determine what aspect of any position is most critical -- what opportunity needs
to be taken immediately or what pitfall needs to be avoided at all costs. This, in turn, de-
termines which move to take. For example, it may be that if you do not immediately
block your opponent's good move, your opponent will gain a clear advantage (or, in the
worst case, a decisive winning position). Clearly, you must prevent this if you can.
Thus, White's decision in Diagram 87 to make the al move, as opposed to a7 (or any
other move), can be viewed as based on the recognition that preventing Black from
gaining control of the al-h8 main diagonal was the most critical, highest priority con-
cern at that moment. All other considerations were secondary. It wouldn't matter wheth-
er White knew that al was a winning move or not. It would be sufficient for White to
know that unless he stopped Black from getting control of the main diagonal, it would
lead to a sure loss.

Diagram 90 presents another example on this topic. It is Black to move. The ques-
tion is: What is the highest priority issue for Black in this position and what move will
best address this issue? First let's take an overview look at the board: Black has numer-
ous choices but few good ones. Black is walled off from the south edge, while White is
walled off from the north and east edges except for the black disc at c2. But Black is un-
der pressure because it is now his move. He has to make a move that breaks across one
of White's two walls. The situation is made worse by the fact that, no matter where
Black goes, White has an excellent response with a6. This will force Black to make a
second undesirable move across White's walls - unless Black can follow White's a6

Othello: Brief & Basic 43
f ag oh with b6. But Black currently does not have
access to b6. Which means that White is
threatening to take both a6 and b6 on subse-
quent moves - forcing Black to make a series
of wall-breaking moves that will seriously
Gf not hopelessly) deteriorate his position.
The priorities are now clear: it is imperative
that Black establish access to b6 immediate-
ly, in as quiet a manner as possible. The best
choice is d1! By flipping the disc at d4, it es-
tablishes undeniable access to b6. As a bo-
nus, it opens up no new moves for White -
White already has access to cl. No other
Black move has all these benefits. It still
may not be certain that Black will win the
game after the dl move, but he has clearly
recognized the highest priority issue and
made the move that best deals with it. A
player that consistently make moves like this is sure to be a tough opponent.

This Handbook, of necessity, provides only the most general of guidelines on how to
prioritize moves. Specific rules are hard to make when so much can vary with different
positions. The usual caveats apply here: In actual games, the highest priority issue may
not be as clear-cut as in the above examples. There may even be several concerns that
seem equally important. Or it may be that there is apparently no move that clearly
solves the highest priority problem. That's when you will need all your Othello skills
and experience to come up with what you hope will be the best choice. The ability to
read positions quickly and accurately is certainly one of the hallmarks of what separates
average-to-good Othello players from true experts.


| ee)
ee Cee
OO@OCO
BOC OO


Oo a mm Oh fF Wo ht

Diagram 90; Black to move

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: THE COMPLETE GAME

In this section, we finally put together all the pieces from the previous 21 points and, for
the first time, examine transcripts of complete games between expert players. But first,
let's review some advice particularly relevant to game transcript analyses:

1. Look for the pivotal pomts im the game (e.g. What opening was chosen and how did it
develop? Who seems to have the lead and who is playing defensively in each phase of the
game? When did the decisive move occur?) Note that the timing or sequencing of moves is
often critical: a move that wins the game if taken immediately, may be a game-losing blun-
der by the player's next turn. Similarly, the placement or flipping of even a single disc can
be critical to the outcome of a game.

2. Try to read the position as the players might have: what was each player's highest pri-
ority concern at each move and why? How did the players resolve decisions involving
multiple considerations and/or apparently equally attractive moves (e.g. trying to decide
which of two quiet moves to take first)?

3. In many of the previous diagrams, the positions were chosen (or even contrived) to
show a particular point as clearly as possible. In a real game, issues are often not that clear.
Real players (even experts) don't always resolve these issues correctly, so don't assume
that these transcripts are free of player errors. Try to discover any critical mistakes.

4. Study the transcripts for examples of how the strategies and tactics discussed in this
Handbook are actually used (e.g. how was control obtained and maintained? How, if at all,
did the player avoid the "tightening noose" of move limitation? Was there an attempt at
"edge-creeping" and was it successful? Did there appear to be any unusual preplanned
openings, good counter-intuitive moves, or unexpected traps etc.?). In summary, try to de-
velop a feel for the "flow" of a game - see each move in the context of an overall plan rath-
er than as an isolated decision.

44 Othello: Brief & Basic
Transcripts. The two transcripts shown
here do not necessarily reflect state-of-the-art
Othello (the first dates back to 1980, while the 1
other is from 1982). But they both represent
well-played games between some of the best

players in the world. The first transcript is the
game in which the U.S.'s Jonathan Cerf won the 5 ae @ 7]
World Championship against Japan's Takuya 4 (39) Mis

Mimura. The first 14 moves are a textbook ex-

ample of the Maruoka diagonal opening (see 5 Miiog®
Point #14). After Mimura's unexpected move

15, Cerf countered with excellent defensive re-  ® er oe
sponses at move 16 and 18. Thus, Cerf's move

18 to d2 effectively blocked Mimura from the ? Is)
POM (see Point #15) at f4, and as an added bo-

nus established access to f4 for himself! An- DO 7Dien
other good defensive move is Cerf's move 26 to Diagram 91

f1, robbing Black of access to f7. The sequence MimurpafB-21) - Cerf€l-433
from move 37 to 44 wound up leaving Mimura

in an essentially hopeless position.

The second transcript is a game from the b d
1982 U.S. Nationals between two of this coun-

try's perennial top players, David Shaman and 1 | | | en Go)

Brian Rose. Shaman chose the perpendicular
opening. The game is marked by the efforts of = ay) 55) (28)

both players to contain the mobility of the other
within different regions of the board (see also 5 DD@Do

Point #13). For example, note how Shaman's 4 |So/GA20IC

move 18 to e8 played into the South area (1.e.

the area where Black already had his greatest 5 my 3
mobility), while Rose's move 19 response (h6)

edge. Rose's move 31 (f2) was regarded as a

mistake (it allows White to effectively respond 7 iceDise
with b4): Black probably should have gone to 5

b4 himself. Finally, the transcript is noteworthy eS EE
for the position that occurs prior to move 45. Diagram 92

Rose made the reasonable move of a7, but after Rose(B-28) - ShoamantW-36)
Shaman's correct continuation of 46. h2, the re-

sult is a losing position for Rose. Rose's correct

(and winning) move was 45. h5 (leading to a likely subsequent sequence of H7-a5-A7-b7,
and giving Rose complete control of the game).

These mini-analyses only touch the surface of what could be said about these games.
Playing the game out yourself will hopefully provide still more insights.

FINAL CONSIDERATIONS & CONCLUSIONS


Sel GEE)

CIOS 21e/S)S)-

VIOOle|-/Oe-
GAS Pooe\e)-
CIBOS OSS /9)-

If someone were to ask me what I consider to be the single most important lesson a nov-
ice player could learn from reading this Handbook, it would be this: A realization, contrary
to some popular opinions, that Othello is not a game of luck nor a game in which planning
ahead is a futile exercise. It is instead a game with well-defined strategical and tactical con-
cepts (ones that are often different from what the novice player initially supposes), and in
which long-term planning is all but essential. Itis my hope that this realization serves to in-
crease your enjoyment and understanding of this fascinating game. I hope it stimulates
your interest to learn still more about the game. To the extent that this Handbook has ac-
complished these goals, it has been successful.

Othello: Brief & Basic 45
In addition, I would hope that the reader gains some insight into the elegant "simplicity"
of Othello. This can be best understood by considering how the better computer Othello
programs decide on their best move (prior to their endgame counting). Their programmers
have not provided them with even a small fraction of all the information presented in this
Handbook. Generally, they rely mostly on just a few of the more fundamental ideas: e.g.
move limitation and mobility, evaporation, value of stable discs. From these few and sim-
ple algorithms, the computer has to "self-generate" the ability to successfully deal with un-
balanced edges, gain control of the main diagonal, spring edge-traps etc. It seems remarka-
ble to me how well some computers can play, given these limitations. It serves as a useful
lesson to humans trying to develop a broad overview of what is important in learning to
play Othello well: the critical ideas are relatively few but extensive in their implications!

And of course, I would hope that this Handbook would enable you to become a better
player, help you to start on the road to joining the ranks of the experts. At the very least, I
hope this book would enable you to observe a game between experts with a much greater
sophistication and a much diminished sense of mystery. There's certainly a wealth of infor-
mation 1n here to assist the aspiring Othello player. But be aware that there is also much to
master that was never even mentioned: more techniques for maintaining mobility that go
beyond evaporation, more on timing of moves and setting up long sequences of moves,
more unusual edge plays and endgame ploys, more on creative and counter-intuitive
moves, much more on preplanned openings, deeper analyses of complete games, how to
play well under tournament time pressure, and more on aspects of Othello that I haven't
even discovered yet. And still more. In fact, the single biggest problem I had in writing
this Handbook was deciding what to leave out. There was always one more point I wanted
to make or one more diagram I wanted to include.

Finally, one of the things that any experts reading this Handbook would know is: every-
thing I've written here is wrong! — at least some of the time. Or to put it in its more usual
terminology: an exception exists for virtually every principle we have covered. But I sup-
pose that's what helps Othello to be the fantastic game that itis. As they say: A minute to
learn, but a lifetime to master!

46 Othello: Brief & Basic
APPENDIX: SELECTED GAME TRANSCRIPTS

This appendix includes a selection of transcripts of games from major tournaments
played during 1984-1986. Their purpose here is to give the reader the opportunity for fur-
ther study of "real game" situations involving current experts. I hope the reader does not
object that four of the transcripts are of games in which I was one of the players. I include
them because they are among the more memorable of the games I have played, even (per-
haps especially) those that I did not win.

The brief comments are no substitute for detailed game analyses, but they do highlight
some critical points in each game. Note particularly how often unforced X-square moves
and corner sacrifices figure prominently in determining the outcomes. Finally, answers to
the questions posed in the discussions below can be found at the end of this appendix.

Game 1. T. Landau (B)-35 vs. D. Shaman
(W)-29. In 1984, I won the U.S. National
Championship with a 5-1 record in the final
rounds. This game against David Shaman was
one of the highlights of the day for me. Note
particularly move 43. b5. Though b4 seemed
like a better move in many ways, I decided that
the highest priority issue was to prevent Sha-
man from wiping me off the a1-h8 central diag-
onal: b4 would allow Shaman to continue with
a4, gaining control of the diagonal; b5 prevent-
ed this. After Shaman accepted the corner sac-
rifice at move 48, I was confident I had won.

2 160K Go

(=) o
SSC ISG h
OSV OOe\s)-

CS |S|Q/Ol|@|e)-
BS/OG O98) S/0)-

1. B: Landau - 35
li: Shaman - 29

Game 2. R. Taniguchi (B)-37 vs. T. Lan-
dau (W)-27. From the U.S. Nationals, I ad-
vanced to the semi-finals of the 1984 World,
Championship. This game was the first of a
best two-out-of-three match against Japanese
Champion, Ryoichi Taniguchi. After narrowly
avoiding being run out of moves in the late
midgame, I reached the position prior to move
44. I had a elegant opportunity for a decisive
winning move here. I came close to finding it -
but close was not good enough. See if you can
find the better alternative.

67028
NOOB)
20}es}eo}eo

aniguchi - 37
andau - 27

oO a om Of fF Wh

JOT:

Game 3. T. Landau (B)-43 vs. R. Taniguchi (W)-21. I recovered from the previous
loss and went on to win this second game of the match. It is one of the very few times a
U.S. player has defeated a Japanese player in a World Championship game. Note the

Othello: Brief & Basic 47
oOo sm OO & TWH RF

Jeleseoo- .eescene:

26-8208

oOo - m& CO & WR


eee Ke Tole ae

MOCADOD

DAO (co 09\e9/49}

OOW0 00)

OO We ees

POOO8 63)

2eOewes

DP ieoleo Di

B: Landau - 453
HW: Taniguchi - 21


Cok eile
SOOODO oo

SOOOOOO)-

COD CDD|Ss)

4. B: Taniguchi - 145
Wi Rolle - 48

ODED OD
ca sialet 1

DO 2212102


a Bee.

Scececesl-

DHBwVIoO
DUD DUD

5, BG: Shaman - 34
HW: Legder - 30

quiet sequence from 27-29, and especially the
decisive move 37. a3. White is on the ropes
now: whether he goes to a2 or a5, Black fol-
lows with 39. b6. If White takes b6 at 38,
Black follows with a5. In any case, White is
shortly run out of safe moves. Unfortunately
for me, I lost the deciding third game and
Taniguchi went on to meet Paul Ralle of
France in the finals.

Game 4. R. Taniguchi (B)-15 vs. P. Ralle
(W)-48. Paul Ralle won the 1984 World
Championship Goiming the U.S.'s Jonathan
Cerf as the only non-Japanese players to do
so) with this dramatic game. The critical posi-
tion is at move 34. Ralle chose the X-square at
b7 and when Taniguchi continued with 35. f1,
Ralle countered with 36. g2! The endgame
was still several moves away, yet Ralle had al-
ready taken two X-squares and two unbal-
anced edges. Despite all this, Taniguchi was

helpless -- Ralle had a clear unassailable win.

Game 5. D. Shaman (B)-34 vs. I. Leader
(W)-30. David Shaman and Imre Leader both
finished with 4-2 records at the 1985 U.S. Na-
tional Championship finals. This necessitated
a play-off game to determine the champion. It
was one of the best games of the tournament.
Note particularly the sequence of moves from
25-27 where Shaman took some questionable
edge positions in exchange for a gain in tem-
po. The trade worked and Shaman went on to
win. It's also worth mentioning that, despite
some unusual appearing moves in the end-
game, Shaman had a_ winning position
throughout the sequence that he never relin-
quished.

Game 6. T. Landau (B)-26 vs. D. Shaman
(W)-38. This game comes from the 1986 U.S.
National Championship. Starting with an un-
common move 5, I eventually established a
midgame advantage by exploiting Shaman's
weak north edge. Some comments: 23. b3
would have probably been preferable to the ac-
tual 23. h2. Next, note how effectively 33. a3
blocks White's potential move to f6 Gf White
tries to reestablish access to f6 with 34. b4, it

Othello: Brief & Basic
sets up a Stoner trap with 35. g2!). Finally, like
fisherman, Othello players seem to remember
best the "one that got away." Here again, as in
Game 2, I let my hard won advantage evapo-
rate in the endgame. The critical position is at
move 45. See if you can come up with the de-
cisive winning move that I missed.

Game 7. D. Shaman (B)-28 vs. B. Rose
(W)-36. This was the second of three games
that Brian Rose and David Shaman played
against each other in the 1986 U.S. Nationals
finals. Here, Shaman declines the opportunity
to take an unbalanced edge by refusing to go to
a2 at move 17. Rose responds by grabbing the
unbalanced edge himself (with a7 at move 18).
Despite sacrificing nearly two entire edges,
Rose gains control of the game by move 40
and goes on to win.

Game 8. D. Shaman (B)-36 vs. B. Rose
(W)-28. Shaman and Rose were tied at 5-1 at
the end of the 1986 U.S. Nationals, necessitat-
ing this play-off game (the second for Shaman
in as many years). Moves 1-16 were identical
to their previous game (see Game 7 above).
This time Shaman took the unbalanced edge at
move 17 (moving to a2). Note how this deci-
sion led to a distinctly different game, despite
the identical opening. Rose's move 34 was
likely a mistake since it allowed the effective
35. g2 (34. b7 would have been better). The
cliff-hanging endgame, though exciting, was
not perfectly played. Shaman's move 47. c8&
was a game-losing mistake -- b8 was the win-
ning move! However, Rose's game-losing
move 52. a7 returned the game to Shaman. See
if you can spot the move Rose should have
made instead.

Game 9. M. Takizawa (B)-35 vs. H. Tam-
enori (W)-29. These final 3 transcripts repre-
sent state-of-the-art Othello as played by the
world's best: the Japanese. If the rationale be-
hind some of the moves seems elusive, don't
despair. They sometimes stymie most of the
rest of us as well. This first game is between
Masaki Takizawa and Hideshi Tamenori (the
1985 and 1986 World Champions respective-
ly), taken from the final rounds of the All-
Japan Student Championship in 1986. Tame-
nori won the tournament -- this was his only fi-
nal round loss. Note move 28: White avoids
the PQM to b5 to gain a tempo along the north

Othello: Brief & Basic

OBER)

OOEs

QDDiev

SOV eo-
fen] »

BAOS/SOee)-
CVO OS/a\e)-

Oo som fh & W he


UCD {CO


~ 1AGeCOcde-

Landau - 26
Shaman - 3

DOWD

QDIOss}

00.05)

COW) @

MD GID

GO@O1e'S10)-

OD D[s069

Qceeaegea:

CHEDIZED D

PISO Oe Ole)-
ese cel.

Shaman - 20
Rose - 36



BES/e1Q) 29"
S/S) 219 O18) O\S)-

COWES eie)-


8. B&B: Shaman - 36
W: Rose - 26
DOO Oo

6 [astanaay ania)
"DOD isolDiseiD

2 AUCOS2D GOD SD

CIPO SOS l|S)-

9, B: Takizawa - 35
H: Toamenori - 29



Zoe Ceee-

SUSCEGERE

DeOCVecee-

“I@l2I2IC1O/O/O\S)-

Takizawa - 26
Tamenori - 30



30/4)





(800)




SOC IERs

20/80)

|B ZOS/O|S/ 9 @|-
“I @IOVE@Ele| ~ “|SOIOee ese)



amenori - 41
atayama - 23

edge. Tamenori made a mistake at move 46. A
different move (with subsequent perfect play)
would have resulted in a 32-32 tie. Can you
find the loss-saving move? It won't be easy.

Game 10. M. Takizawa (B)-26 vs. H.
Tamenori (W)-38. This rematch of Takizawa
and Tamenori came from another 1986 Japa-
nese tournament. This time Tamenori won.
Note Tamenori's early C-square move at 18,
necessary to avoid being run out of moves. By
move 40, White seems to be in control despite
his spread out edges -- and proceeds to victo-


Game 11. H. Tamenori (B)-41 vs. Y. Ka-
tayama (W)-23. This was the final game for
the 1986 Japanese National Championship -
Tamenori defeating Yuji Katayama. Note par-
ticularly moves 45-47: Black sacrifices the al
corner with 45. b2, but White cannot afford to
take it (or Black will have free moves at a2
and bl). So White hands the corner back to
Black with 46. a2! Black declines the al cor-
ner for the moment, taking the hl corner in-
stead -- exchanging the unbalanced east edge
for a gain in tempo. In case you're wondering,
White had a losing position after Black's 45.
b2; White's 46. a2 was not a game-losing mis-
take.

Answers to Questions

Game 2. If White goes to b2 at move 4,
Black will lose. If Black continues with 45.
gl, White makes the semi-forcing move: 46.
a2. With any other Black move 45, White can
win with 46. b1. Unfortunately, I choose b1 at
move 44, which blocked my later access to b2.
When I finally realized this, it was too late: the
mistake had cost me the game.

Game 6. Black 45. f1 wins easily (a fact

that I didn't take note of until move 47, much
to my chagrin!). After 45. f1, if White takes

Othello: Brief & Basic
back at g1, Black continues with 47. b7, gaining secure control of the main diagonal. If
White goes anyplace else at move 46, White takes the al corner at move 47. Despite the
ill-considered move 45 to h7, Black still had a chance for victory at move 47. The oppor-
tunity to go to f1 was gone, yet the unlikely move of 47. g7 leads to a 36-28 win (assum-
ing subsequent perfect play: g7-A7-b2-H8-g8-A1-a2-H1-a8-B8-f1-G1-b7-PASS-g2).
Black chose g2 instead and went on to lose.

Game 8. White should have gone to b8 rather than a7. The perfect play sequence is as
follows: B8-g1-PASS-b7-A8-b1-C1-b2-A1-a7 (White wins 34-30).

Game 9. White should have gone toa6 rather than a3. The perfect play sequence is as
follows: A6-a5-A4-a3-A 1-g8-H8-b8-A2-292-H1-g1-H7-g7-PASS-b1.

Othello: Brief & Basic 51
REFERENCES

In writing Brief & Basic, the most significant source of background material were ar-
ticles that originally appeared in Othello Quarterly (OQ). Below is a partial list of the
more influential articles that I used:
Cerf, J., Limiting Your Opponent's Options, OQ, Summer 1979
Cerf, J., Unbalancing Yourself, OQ, Winter 1981/82
Cerf, J., Introduction to Othello Strategy, OQ, Spring 1982
Cerf, J., Introduction to Endgames, OQ, Fall, 1982
Hall, R., Lose the Corner, Win the Game (Part 1), OQ, Spring 1983
Hall, R., Lose the Corner, Win the Game (Part 2), OQ, Summer 1983
Jacobs, C. & Jacobs, E., Unbalancing Your Opponent, OQ, Spring 1979
Kling, A., Opening Strategy, Tactics, and Analysis, OQ, Summer 1983
Landau, T., Black and Blue: The Hazards of Playing Black, OQ, Spring 1981
Landau, T., Midgame Strategy: Patterns, OQ, Spring 1982
Landau, T., A Catalog of Openings, OQ, Spring 1983
Landau, T., Gaining Control, OQ, Summer 1983
Landau, T., From the Jaws of Defeat: The Semi-Forcing Move, OQ, Fall 1983
Osborne, M., Denying Access, OQ, Summer 1983
Stringham, G., Fundamental Othello Misconceptions, OQ, Fall 1980
Sullivan, G., Dangers of the Isolated C-Square, OQ, Winter 1979/80
Sullivan, G., Controlling the Central Diagonal, OQ, Fall 1981

In addition to the above articles, the interested reader is strongly encouraged to seek
out the numerous game analyses and transcripts from tournaments that regularly appear
in OQ. These provide invaluable insights into "real game" situations. A partial listing of
some of the more instructive game analyses includes:
Cerf, J., Cerf vs. Mimura, OQ, Winter 1980/81
Rose, B., Shaman vs. Rose 1986, OQ, Winter 1986/87
Shaman, D., Tamenori vs. Takizawa, OQ, Spring 1987
Sullivan, G., Playing Defensively: Game Analysis, OQ, Spring 1981
Sullivan, G., Rose vs. Shaman, OQ, Summer 1983

Othello: Brief & Basic 52
Finally, OQ frequently publishes puzzles of various sorts that provide an opportunity
for you to test your own skills. Perhaps the best of these has been the "It's Your Move"
series of articles by Amold Kling that have been appearing in OQ since the Summer
1984 issue. For example, "It's Your Move" in the Spring 1987 OQ was devoted to the is-
sue of "decisive moves", as discussed in Point #21 of Brief & Basic.

OQ continues to publish useful tutorial articles. Check out the more recent issues
(1988-present) for relevant articles not included in this reference section.

OTHER BOOKS ON OTHELLO

Books on Othello, are a relative rarity (especially if you want one written in English).
Here is a listing of those of which I am aware (together with some brief commentary):

Ball, J.A. & Parker, J.R., The Key to Othello, 1981 (English)
A small pamphlet (akin to Brief & Basic) that comes from England. Most ideas are in
the right direction, but not enough solid information. Overstates the importance of cer-
tain principles of play.

Hasegawa, Goro, How to Win at Othello, 1977 (English translation of Japanese by
Maxine Brady)

The worst possible book. Avoid it at all costs. It can do serious harm to your Othello
ability. Ironically, it was written by the Japanese "inventor" of Othello (who apparent-
ly understood little of what his game is about). Unfortunately, this is the only book on
Othello to ever get wide distribution in the United States. Thankfully, it is no longer in
print. The only lingering contribution of this text is the terminology for A,B,C, and X
squares.

Inoue, H., A Discovery of Reversals, 1977 (Japanese)
Though written in Japanese, it is an excellent text just for the diagrams, especially on
openings and endgame positions. The author is one of Japan's first crop of great Othel-
lo players and a former World Champion.

Japan Othello Game Association, How to Othello, 1983 (Japanese)
A more up-to-date treatment of Othello from the Japanese. Again useful for the dia-
grams. Overall, does not seem as elegant a text as Inoue's classic.

Pingaud, Francois, Othello/Reversi, 1983 (French)
A good introductory text. The author was aware of OQ and even borrowed some ideas
and terminology from it. If you understand French even minimally, you would prob-
ably get some benefit from this text.

I am also aware of a Japanese text (published in 1986) on computer Othello (exact title
untranslated). And speaking of...

COMPUTER OTHELLO

If you are seeking a computer opponent to play against, be aware that most of the
Othello programs out there play a terrible game and use little or none of the principles
discussed in Brief & Basic. The better programs available are a frequent topic of discus-
sion in OQ, and I refer you there for the latest information. Systems are also available for
generating perfect-play endgame sequences. Clarence Hewlett (the current Editor of OQ)
has done extensive work in this area, having developed a state-of-the-art system that can
search as far back as 26 moves from the end of the game!

53 Othello: Brief & Basic
INDEX

access, denying, 17
American style of play, 37
anchor, 23
balance (an edge), 9, 41
block (or defensive move), 26
blocking techniques, 17
board notation & terminology, 2
Boscov edge pattern, 39
brute force approach, 32
C-square trap, 8
central (or main) diagonal, 10
checkerboarding, 22, 26, 29
checkerboards, 29
closed edge, 38
control of the center, 6
control of the diagonal, 10, 12
control, 5
corner sacrifice, 9
comer square, 3
count the position, 30
creep along the edge, 29
cutting across the main diagonal, 11
decisive move, 42
defensive move (or block), 26
denying access, 17
developing an edge, 38
diagonal opening, 24
double wall, 28
dual-unbalanced edge, 41
dynamic square evaluation, 5
edge double wall, 29
edge moves, head-on, 37
edge moves, slanted (or diagonal), 37
edge patterns, 39
edge play, general concepts, 35
edge traps, 39, 40
edges
balanced edge, 9, 41
Boscov edge pattern, 39
closed edge, 38
creep along the edge, 29
developing an edge, 38
dual-unbalanced edge, 41
edge double wall, 29
edge moves, head-on, 37
edge moves, slanted (or diagonal), 37
edge patterns, 39
edge play, general concepts, 35
edge traps, 39, 40
even four, 41
initiating an edge, 36
open edge, 38
resolved edge, 40

Othello: Brief & Basic

resolving an edge, 40
secure edge, 38
table edge position, 12, 38
unbalanced edge, 9, 41
uneven three, 21
endgame, 2
equipment, 1
evaporation, 6
European style of play, 37
even four, 41
even-numbered region, 15
feeding your opponent, 33
filled-in region, 16
flip (disc), 1
forced move, 4
free move, 14
frontier, 6
gain a tempo, 13
good move, 2, 5,7, 27
Heath opening, 24, 27, 29
hole, 38
initiating an edge, 36
interior sweep, 32
isolated C-sqaure, 8
last move, 13
legal move, 1
main (or central) diagonal, 10
maintain parity, 17
maximize the final disc count, 32
midgame,2
mobility optimization, 5
move limitation, 5
moves
block (or defensive move), 26
decisive move, 42
defensive move (or block), 26
edge moves, head-on, 37
edge moves, slanted (or diagonal), 37
forced move, 4
free move, 14
good move, 2, 5,7, 27
last move, 13
legal move, 1
move limitation, 5
offensive move (or set-up), 26
passed move, 1
perfectly quiet move (PQM), 25
poisoned move, 19
prioritizing of moves, 43
quiet move, 25
reflex move, 26
right move, 2
run an opponent out of moves, 13


safe move, 13
semi-forced move, 20
semi-forcing move, 20
set-up (or offensive move), 26
waiting move, 26
object of Othello, 1
odd-numbered region, 16
offensive move (or set-up), 26
open edge, 38
opening book, 23
opening up an area, 21
opening, 2
openings
diagonal opening, 24
Heath opening, 24, 27, 29
parallel opening, 25
perpendicular opening, 24
option quality, 6
option quantity, 6
options, 5
Othello, origins of, 1
Othello Quarterly (OQ), v
outflank (disc), 1
parallel opening, 25
parity, 17
passed move, |
patterns, 27
checkerboards, 29
double wall, 28
edge double wall, 29
sandwich, 27
X-pattern, 27
perfect play sequence, 15,31
perfectly quiet move (PQM), 25
perpendicular opening, 24
pick-off, 21
poisoned move, 19
prioritizing of moves, 43
quiet move, 25
read the position, 43
reflex move, 26
regional mobility, 21
resolved edge, 40
resolving an edge, 40
Reversi, 1
right move, 2
rules, 1
run an opponent out of moves, 13
rush to the edge, 35
safe move, 13
sandwich, 27
sealing off, 18
secure edge, 38

self-poisoning, 19
semi-forced move, 20
semi-forcing move, 20

sente, 13

set-up (or offensive move), 26
squeeze plays, 15

stable disc, 3

Stoner trap, 11

sweet-sixteen, 27

table edge position, 12,38
taking an edge head-on, 37
taking an edge slanted (diagonally), 37
tempo vs. position, 36
transcripts, 45

unbalanced edge, 9, 41
uneven three, 21

USS. Othello Association (USOA), v
unpoisoning, 19

waiting move, 26

wall, 6

wedge, 9,38

wedged in, 41

Wipe-out, 22, 32

X-pattern, 27

X-square, 3

Othello: Brief & Basic
U.S. National Othello Champions

Name

Carol Jacobs
Carol Jacobs
Jonathan Cerf
Jonathan Cerf
Brian Rose
David Shaman
Brian Rose
Ted Landau
David Shaman
David Shaman
Brian Rose
Brian Rose
David Shaman

World Othello Champions

Year

1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987

1988
1989

Name

Hiroshi Inoue (Japan)
Hidenori Maruoka (Japan)
Hiroshi Inoue (Japan)
Jonathan Cerf (U.S.A.)
Hidenori Maruoka (Japan)
Kunihiko Tanida (Japan)
Kenichi Ishii (Japan)

Paul Ralle (France)
Masaki Takizawa (Japan)
Hideshi Tamenori (Japan)
Individual: Kenichi Ishii (Japan)

Team: U.S.A.

Individual: Takeshi Murakami (Japan)
Team: England

Individual: Hideshi Tamenori (Japan)
Team: England

About the author: Ted Landau was the 1984 U.S. National
Othello Champion, finishing third in the World Championship that

year. He was editor of Othello Quarterly from 1984-1986 and
has written more than a dozen articles on the game of Othello.

Othello: Brief & Basic

Othello: Brief & Basic

An introduction to strategy and tactics for the game of Othello

by Ted Landau
Former USOA National Champion

Features:

Covers all aspects of Othello from opening to endgame
High quality laser-printer text with over 100 illustrations
Additional game transcripts

Key word index

Price: $6.00

$5.00 for USOA members
$8.00 for all overseas orders (members & non-members)
Discounts available for multiple-copy orders. Inquire.

Send orders and/or information requests to:

Brief & Basic/USOA
P.O. Box 342
Falls Church, VA 22040 USA

The official handbook of the
United States Othello Association

",..excellent...clearly written...the book can, literally overnight, turn a beginner
into a formidable opponent..." — R. Wayne Schmittberger, Games Magazine

